# Physical Development


**The Brain:** A newborn’s brain is about 25% of its adult weight at birth, but it grows rapidly and is about 80% of its adult weight by the time a child is two years old. Most neurons are present at birth and the increase in size is due to *synaptogenesis* (the creation of new synapses), the growth of new dendrites, and myelination, in which the axons become covered in a fatty substance (myelin) that acts as an insulator and speeds up the transmission of nerve impulses. Synaptogenesis peaks at two to three years of age, and synapses that are used most often are subsequently strengthened and become more efficient while those that are unused atrophy and disappear. This loss of synapses is referred to as *synaptic pruning*, and it continues through adolescence. The cerebral cortex is the least developed area of the brain at birth, and it continues to develop following birth, with the prefrontal cortex (which controls executive cognitive functions) not reaching maturity until the late teens or early to mid-20s.

Brain weight and volume begin to gradually decrease at around 30 years of age as the result of the loss of neurons, and this process accelerates after about age 60. With regard to the cortex, the studies indicate that the decrease in size is greatest for the frontal lobes (especially the prefrontal cortex) and the parietal lobes (e.g., Resnick et al., 2003). Research has also found that the brain compensates for some neuron loss by developing new connections between the remaining neurons and *neurogenesis* (the production of new neurons) in the hippocampus and possibly other areas of the brain. 
**Vision:** Vision is the least developed sense at birth but it improves rapidly. At birth, newborns have limited visual acuity and see at about 20 feet what normal adults see at 400 to 600 feet; but, by about 7 or 8 months of age, their visual acuity is similar to that of normal adults. Despite their limited vision, newborns prefer to look at patterned stimuli rather than non-patterned stimuli and prefer facial to non-facial images. By one to two months of age, they prefer to look at the faces of their mothers and other caregivers to the faces of strangers.

Depth perception relies on three types of depth information: Beginning as early as three or four weeks of age, infants rely on kinetic (motion) cues, which are based on the movement of objects. Between two and three months of age, they begin using binocular (stereoscopic) cues, which are derived from the integration of images received by each eye. Then, by about five or six months of age, babies begin using pictorial (static-monocular) cues, which can be perceived with only one eye, create the impression of depth, and include size, texture gradients, shadows, and linear perspective. 

Vision and hearing are the first senses to show age-related declines in adulthood. By about 40 years of age, many adults begin to experience *presbyopia*, which is due to a hardening of the lens of the eye, which makes it difficult to focus on nearby objects. Other changes that occur in middle adulthood or later include decreased sensitivity to low levels of illumination, slower dark adaptation, increased sensitivity to glare, reduced ability to discriminate between colors, and decreased depth perception.

**Audition:** Immediately after birth, newborns are somewhat less sensitive than adults to sound, especially high-frequency sounds, but their sensitivity to high-frequency sounds develops quickly and comes close to adult levels by six months of age. Within a few days after birth, infants prefer the voice of their mothers to the voice of a stranger and other sounds. They also exhibit auditory (sound) localization and reflexively turn their heads toward the source of sounds, but this ability decreases when infants are between two and four months of age. It then re-emerges and becomes more deliberate and precise and improves to nearly adult levels by about 12 months of age (Clifton, 1992). 

Hearing starts to decline for most adults at about 40 years of age, beginning with decreased sensitivity to high-frequency sounds (presbycusis) that makes it difficult to understand women’s and young children’s voices as well as fricative consonants (e.g., f, s, t) , which are softer and higher-pitched than vowels and other consonants, and non-human sounds such as the beeping of a microwave, the buzzing of a clothes dryer, and the chirping of birds. The effects of presbycusis are exacerbated in the presence of background noise. There’s evidence that the severity of age-related hearing loss is related to the risk for developing Alzheimer’s disease and other neurocognitive disorders (Thomson et al., 2017)

**Touch and Pain:** Touch is the first sense to develop in utero, and newborns have a well-developed sense of touch at birth. For example, they respond to a touch to their cheeks by turning their heads in the direction of the touch. They’re also sensitive to pain, and the research has shown that newborn male infants cry intensely during circumcision at three days of age when they’re not given an anesthetic (Gunnar, Malone, & Fisch, 1987). There’s also evidence that early exposure to painful experiences affects future responses to pain. Taddio, Katz, Ilersich, and Koren (1997) found that newborns who were not given topical anesthesia during circumcision responded more intensely than those who were given an anesthetic when they received routine vaccinations four to six months later. Note, however, that subsequent research found that the later response to pain differs for full-term and preterm infants: Early exposure to pain heightens later responsivity for full-term infants but dampens later responsivity for preterm infants (Taddio & Katz, 2005).

**Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS)**: SIDS is “the unexpected death, usually during the night, of an infant younger than 1 year of age that remains unexplained after thorough investigation” (Berk, 2013, p. 136). Although the cause of SIDS is not clear, there’s evidence that it’s related to serotonin abnormalities in the medulla, which is a part of the brainstem that regulates breathing and other vital functions. Factors that increase the risk for SIDS include male gender, African American or Native American race, 6 months of age or younger (peak age 2 to 4 months), premature birth, low birth weight, poor prenatal care, maternal use of alcohol or drugs during pregnancy, pre- and postnatal exposure to cigarette smoke, and unsafe sleep practices (bed-sharing, soft or loose bedding, sleeping on stomach). Factors that reduce the risk for SIDS include having the baby sleep on his/her back, breast feeding the baby, keeping the crib as bare as possible, avoiding overheating the baby, sharing a room (but not a bed) with the baby, and offering the baby a pacifier without a strap or string at nap times and bedtime.

**Gross Motor Milestones:**  The following table summarizes major milestones for gross motor skills during the first five years of life (Scharf, Scharf, & Stroustrup, 2016). Note that the exact age at which each milestone occurs varies somewhat from individual to individual, but the order in which they occur is similar for most children.
| Age                                                                                                                                                                                                | Gross Motor Milestones                                                                                                                                                                             |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1-3 months                                                                                                                                                                                         | chin and then chest up in prone position, props on forearms in prone position, rolls to side                                                                                                       |
| 4-6 months                                                                                                                                                                                         | sits with trunk support and then with pelvic support, rolls front to back and then back to front, puts arms out when falling                                                                       |
| 7-9 months                                                                                                                                                                                         | sits without support steadily, pulls to sitting/kneeling position, begins creeping, pulls to stand                                                                                                 |
| 10-12 months                                                                                                                                                                                       | creeps well, cruises furniture with both hands and then one hand, walks with two hands held and then with one hand, takes independent steps                                                        |
| 13-15 months                                                                                                                                                                                       | stands without pulling up, walks well, stoops to pick up toy, creeps up stairs, walks carrying toy                                                                                                 |
| 16-18 months                                                                                                                                                                                       | walks backward, walks up stairs with one hand held, runs well, throws ball while standing                                                                                                          |
| 19-30 months                                                                                                                                                                                       | walks down stairs with one hand held, walks up stairs and then downstairs holding rail with both feet on each step, kicks ball, throws ball overhand, jumps from bottom step with one foot leading |
| 31-36 months                                                                                                                                                                                       | walks swinging arms opposite of legs, balances on one foot for 3 seconds, walks up stairs with alternating feet and without holding rail, pedals tricycle, catches ball with stiff arms            |
| 4 years                                                                                                                                                                                            | hops on one foot two or three times, balances on one foot 4 to 8 seconds, throws ball overhand 10 feet, catches bounced ball                                                                       |
| 5 years                                                                                                                                                                                            | walks down stairs with alternating feet and without holding rail, hops on one foot 15 times, balances on one foot for more than 8 seconds, walks backward heel-toe, jumps backward                 |

 
**Physical Maturation in Adolescence:** The adolescent growth spurt refers to the rapid increase in height and weight that marks the beginning of adolescence. It usually begins at 10 or 11 years of age for girls and 12 or 13 years of age for boys. For both girls and boys, the growth spurt reaches its peak velocity about two years after it starts and then slows down, and it lasts for a total of three to four years.

Puberty (sexual maturation) begins before or at about the same time as the growth spurt, and the timing of puberty has different behavioral and emotional consequences for boys and girls (e.g., Berger, 2009; Berk, 2013; Shroeder & Smith-Boydston, 2017): (a) For boys, early onset puberty is associated with a number of positive consequences including higher levels of self-esteem and social maturity, greater popularity with peers, and better athletic skills. However, it’s also been linked to higher levels of alcohol use and antisocial behavior and precocious sexual behavior. In contrast, late onset puberty is associated with lower levels of self-esteem and popularity, poorer academic performance, and higher levels of anxiety and depression. (b) For girls, early onset puberty is associated with a number of negative consequences including lower levels of self-esteem and popularity; poorer academic achievement; a higher risk for precocious sexual behavior; and higher rates of substance use, depression, anxiety, eating disorders, and disruptive behavior disorders. Several studies have identified predictors of early onset puberty in girls. For example, Ellis and Garber (2000) found that it was associated with maternal mood disorder, absence of biological father, presence of stepfather or maternal boyfriend, and discordant family relationships. Finally, research on the effects of late onset puberty for girls is limited, and the existing studies have provided mixed results with regard to both psychosocial and academic outcomes.
**Adolescent Substance Use and Abuse:**  Data from the National Survey of Drug Use and Health (SAMHSA, 2025) indicate that substance use among youth 12 to 17 years of age was relatively stable during the previous few years: As presented in Table A.1B, in 2024, 6.6% of respondents in this age group reported drinking alcohol in the past month, 6.0% reported use of nicotine vaping, 6.0% reported using marijuana, and 1.9% reported using tobacco products (cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, cigars, pipe tobacco).

Researchers have identified a number of risk and protective factors associated with adolescent substance abuse (Monasterio, 2014; U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2003; Whitesell et al., 2013): Risk factors include exposure to stressful life events, parental substance abuse, a weak parent-child relationship, affiliation with deviant/substance-involved peers, mental health problems (especially depression and untreated ADHD), favorable attitudes toward drug use, poor social skills, and academic failures. Protective factors include parental disapproval of substance use, supportive parenting, age-appropriate parental monitoring of social behavior, academic success, involvement in extracurricular activities, positive peer influences, good self-control, and religiosity. The research has also shown that religiosity, self-control, and parental support have a buffering effect, which means that each of these protective factors reduces the adverse effects of stressful life events on substance use (Wills & Ainette, 2008; Wills & Cleary, 1996; Wills, Yaeger, & Sandy, 2003). 
 
Researchers interested in the impact of brain development on adolescent substance abuse point out that the limbic system develops earlier than the prefrontal cortex, which continues to develop throughout adolescence. The limbic system is involved in emotions and motivation and includes the nucleus accumbens, which is part of the brain’s reward circuit; the prefrontal cortex is involved in planning, decision-making, and impulse control. Because of this difference in development, adolescents are likely to make decisions based on emotions and pleasure rather than rational thinking, which leads to a greater likelihood of substance use and other impulsive, risk-taking behaviors (e.g., Winters & Arria, 2011). Finally, because of the effects of alcohol and other addictive drugs on the developing brain, individuals who began using these drugs in early adolescence are at greater risk for a substance use disorder than are those who delay drug use to late adolescence or early adulthood (Steinberg, Bornstein, Vandell, & Rook, 2011).

**Adolescent Sleep Deprivation**: Chronic sleep deprivation is common during adolescence and has been linked to a number of negative consequences including an increased risk for depression, anxiety, and substance use; impaired concentration, memory, and information processing; and an increase in headaches, stomachaches, and other physical symptoms. According to Carskadon (2011), adolescent sleep deprivation is the result of a “perfect storm” that is created by a combination of biological, societal, and psychosocial factors: The main biological factor is delayed sleep onset that accompanies puberty as the result of changes in the secretion of melatonin. The primary societal factor is an early starting time for school that limits the available time for sleep, while the psychosocial factors include greater autonomy over bedtimes, increased academic pressures, and excessive screen time (use of screen-based media) in the evening. Two of these factors – early school start time and excessive screen time – have strong research support as contributors to adolescent sleep deprivation. For example, there is evidence that excessive screen time can exacerbate delayed sleep onset by suppressing melatonin production (Hale & Guan, 2015).

**Sexual Orientation:** Most contemporary research on the determinants of sexual orientation has focused on biological factors. For example, studies investigating the contribution of genetics have found that monozygotic twins are more likely than dizygotic twins to have the same sexual orientation and that the impact of genetics is stronger for males than for females (e.g., Sanders et al., 2017). In addition, one of the most consistent findings is that the likelihood that a boy will be gay increases for each older brother born to the same mother (e.g., Blanchard, 2018; Khovanova, 2020). One explanation for this *fraternal birth order effect* is the maternal immune hypothesis which proposes that it “reflects the progressive immunization of some mothers to male-specific antigens by each succeeding male fetus and the increasing effects of such immunization on sexual differentiation of the brain in each succeeding male fetus” (Blanchard, 2004, p. 173). Note, however, that the results of studies confirming the fraternal birth order effect have been challenged primarily on methodological grounds (e.g., Vilsmeier et al., 2021).

**Sexual Fluidity:** Sexual fluidity refers to changes in a person’s sexual attractions and/or behaviors over time and in different situations that are inconsistent with the person’s self-described sexual orientation. The studies have found that sexual fluidity occurs in both men and women but that it is somewhat more common in women (Diamond, 2016). Note that sexual fluidity is not the same as bisexuality: Sexual fluidity is transient and situation dependent, while bisexuality involves a stable and persistent pattern of sexual attraction to both men and women.
