# Socioemotional Development – Moral Development

Piaget and Kohlberg’s theories are the most frequently cited theories of moral development.

**Piaget’s Theory:** Piaget proposed that cognitive development is necessary for moral development and that the developmental process of understanding moral standards is similar to the process of understanding game rules. Consequently, to study moral development, he asked children to respond to dilemmas involving violations of game rules. Based on the results his research, Piaget concluded that moral development involves three stages:
(a) *Premoral Stage:* This stage lasts from birth to about five years of age. During this stage, children have very limited understanding of rules and moral behavior.

(b) *Heteronomous Stage:* This stage begins at about five or six years of age. During this stage children believe that rules are made by authorities and cannot be changed. When judging behaviors that have negative consequences, they base their judgments primarily on the consequences of the behavior.

(c) *Autonomous Stage:* This stage begins when children are about 10 or 11 years old. Children in this stage believe that rules are determined by agreement between people and can be changed by agreement. When judging behaviors that have negative consequences, they base their judgments primarily on the actor’s intentions.

Piaget’s theory of moral development has been the target of criticism. Two major criticisms are that it underestimates the cognitive abilities and moral understanding of young children and erroneously contends that moral development stops in late childhood or early adolescence (Louw & Louw, 2014).
**Kohlberg’s Theory:**  Kohlberg studied moral reasoning by presenting subjects with moral dilemmas and asking them to judge each dilemma and explain the reasons for their judgments. One of the best known of his dilemmas is the “Heinz dilemma” that asked subjects to decide if it’s better for a husband to steal a drug to save his wife’s life or to obey the law by not stealing the drug and, as a result, risk his wife’s life. Based on his results, Kohlberg concluded that moral reasoning involves three levels that each have two stages. He proposed that the stages are universal and always occur in the same order and are related to the person’s levels of cognitive development and social perspective-taking. He also proposed that the ability to predict a person’s behavior from his/her stage of moral development is strongest at the higher stages of development.

*Level 1: Preconventional Morality:* The two stages of this level are (a) the punishment and obedience stage, during which the acceptability of a behavior depends on whether or not the behavior leads to punishment, and (b) the instrumental hedonism stage, during which the acceptability of a behavior depends on whether or not it leads to rewards or satisfies the person’s needs.

*Level 2: Conventional Morality:* The two stages of this level are (a) the “good boy/good girl” stage, during which the acceptability of a behavior depends on whether or not it is socially approved of or liked by others, and (b) the law and order orientation stage, during which the acceptability of a behavior depends on whether or not it violates laws and rules that have been established by legitimate authorities.

*Level 3: Postconventional Morality:* The two stages of this level are (a) the morality of contract, individual rights, and democratically accepted laws, during which the acceptability of a behavior is whether or not it’s consistent with democratically chosen laws, and (b) the morality of individual principles of conscience, during which the acceptability of a behavior is whether or not it’s consistent with broad, universally applicable general principles (e.g., justice, fairness).

Kohlberg’s theory has been criticized on several grounds. One criticism is that, like Piaget, Kohlberg underestimates the moral reasoning of young children (Shaffer, 2009). Another criticism is that his theory is too rigid and linear and does not take into account that children’s moral judgements may vary as a result of their current level of motivation and the current context – e.g., in some situations, a person may exhibit Stage 2 reasoning but, in others, stage 4 reasoning (Krebs & Denton, 2005). In addition, the theory has been criticized by Gilligan (1982) for being androcentric because Kohlberg included only male subjects in his research. She argues that the moral judgments of males are often based on concerns related to justice and individual rights, while women are more likely to base their moral judgments on concerns related to care and responsibility. Kohlberg’s theory has also been criticized for being culturally biased, with his stages (especially stages 5 and 6) being more characteristic of people living in Western than non-Western cultures (Berger, 3003). Finally, some critics argue that how people think about hypothetical moral dilemmas is not necessarily how they think about or act in response to real-life dilemmas (White, 2003).

**Peers and Parents as Contributors to Moral Development:** Piaget and Kohlberg both concluded that peers have a greater influence on a child’s moral development than parents do. Their emphasis on the impact of peers is based on the assumption that “adult unilateral authority often dominates adult-child relationships thus precluding discussion about moral decisions, while the equality of peer relationships allows for mutual negotiation for the resolution of moral problems” (Hart, Goel, & Atkins, 2017, p. 531). Other investigators argue that parents are more important contributors to children’s moral development, with several investigators linking it to parenting style. For example, there is evidence that an induction style of discipline is associated with more advanced levels of moral reasoning than power assertion and love withdrawal styles are (e.g., Hoffman & Saltzstein, 1967). The induction style involves explaining why a behavior is wrong, with the emphasis being on how the behavior affects other people.

