# Socioemotional Development – Attachment, Emotions, and Social Relationships

**Socioemotional Development – Attachment, Emotions, and Social Relationships

Attachment:**  Attachment refers to “the strong, affectionate tie that humans have with special people in their lives, which leads them to feel pleasure when interacting with those people and to be comforted by their nearness in times of stress” (Berk, 2013, p. 428).

1. **Early Research:** Among the earliest investigations of attachment were studies conducted by Harlow and Zimmerman (1959). Subjects in their research were infant monkeys who were reared by two surrogate “mothers” – a wire-mesh mother and a cloth mother. Even when food was provided by the wire mother, the monkeys became attached to the cloth mother and spent time clinging to her and ran to her when they were upset or afraid. Based on these results, Harlow and Zimmerman concluded that *contact comfort* is an important contributor to an infant’s attachment to his/her caregivers.
Another early theory is Bowlby’s (1969) *ethological theory*, which proposes that infants and their mothers are biologically predisposed to form an attachment to help ensure the survival of the infant: The innate attachment-related behaviors of infants include sucking, crying, smiling, and cooing, and these behaviors elicit the mother’s attention and care and keep her in close proximity to the infant. Bowlby’s theory also distinguishes between four stages of attachment that occur during the first two years of life: preattachment, attachment-in-the-making, clear-cut attachment, and the formation of reciprocal relationships. According to Bowlby, an infant’s attachment relationships during these stages lead to the development of *internal working models* that consist of beliefs about the self, others, and the self in relationship to others and that affect future relationships.

2. **Signs of Attachment:** Signs of attachment first become apparent at about six months of age and include the following: (a) At six to eight months, infants begin to exhibit *social referencing* and look to caregivers to determine how to act in ambiguous and unfamiliar situations. (b) *Separation anxiety* also begins at about six to eight months, is most intense from 14 to 18 months, and thereafter gradually declines. (c) *Stranger anxiety* begins at about eight to ten months and begins to decline at about age two.

3. **Patterns of Attachment:** Ainsworth and her colleagues (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978) used the “strange situation” to study attachment in babies one to two years of age. It consists of brief episodes in which babies are separated and reunited with their mothers several times. Their research identified four attachment patterns: (a) A baby with *secure attachment* explores the room when his/her mother is present, may or may not cry when she leaves, actively seeks contact with her when she returns, and prefers her to a stranger. Mothers of these babies are sensitive and responsive. (b) A baby with *insecure/resistant (ambivalent) attachment* stays close to his/her mother initially, is distressed when she leaves, may be angry and resist her attempts at contact when she returns, and is fearful of a stranger even when his/her mother is present. Mothers of these children are inconsistent in their caregiving. (c) A baby with *insecure/avoidant attachment* seems indifferent toward his/her mother, exhibits little distress when she leaves, avoids her when she returns, and reacts to his/her mother and to a stranger in a similar way. Mothers of these children are either rejecting or intrusive and over-stimulating. (d) A baby with *disorganized/disoriented attachment* is fearful of his/her mother and often has a dazed or confused facial expression. A baby with this pattern may or may not be distressed when his/her mother leaves and exhibits disorganized, confused behavior when she returns and when with a stranger. The majority of these babies have been maltreated by their caregivers.

4. **Attachment, Cognitive Skills, and Academic Achievement:** Research comparing the effects of parent-child attachment has linked secure attachment during early childhood to better cognitive skills and academic achievement. For example, West et al. (2013) found that children who had secure mother-child attachment at 24 and 36 months of age had higher IQ scores and better academic achievement in 3rd and 4th grade. In addition, Yang et al.’s (2024) meta-analysis of the research confirmed that parent-child attachment security is positively related not only to the academic achievement of children and adolescents but also to their academic motivation and engagement.

5. **Adult Attachment Patterns:** Research using the Adult Attachment Interview (AAI) has found a relationship between the early attachment experiences of parents and the attachment patterns of their children (van Ijzendoorn, 1997): (a) Adults who are classified as *autonomous* on the AAI provided coherent descriptions of their childhood relationships with their parents. Their children usually have secure attachment. (b) Adults who are categorized as *preoccupied* exhibited angry, confused, or passive preoccupation toward a parent when describing their childhood relationships. Their children usually have a resistant attachment pattern. (c) Adults who are classified as *dismissing* provided positive descriptions of their childhood relationships, but their descriptions were not supported or were contradicted by their actual memories. Their children often have an avoidant attachment pattern.
6. **The Impact of Socioeconomic Status and Culture on Attachment**: Studies investigating the relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and childhood attachment have found that low-SES children are more likely than those from other SES backgrounds to be insecurely attached to their caregivers. There’s evidence that this relationship is actually due to risk factors associated with low SES (rather than low SES itself) such as poor parental education, parental drug use, and father absence. Note, however, that “secure attachment occurs in spite of poverty when parenting quality is good” (Bergin & Bergin, 2015, p. 245). Research investigating adult attachment has found that the dismissing attachment pattern is overrepresented among low-SES mothers, with the overrepresentation being greatest for low-SES adolescent mothers (van IJzendoorn & Bakermans-Kranenburg, 2010).

Researchers interested in the relationship between culture and childhood attachment have found that secure attachment is the most common pattern in both Western and non-Western cultures and that variations in attachment are related more to differences in caregiving quality than cultural differences (Bergin & Bergin, 2015; Cole, Cole, & Lightfoot, 2005). However, there appear to be cultural differences in the relative rates of insecure attachment classifications: For example, van IJzendoorn and Kroonenberg’s (1988) meta-analysis of studies conducted in eight countries found that the insecure/avoidant pattern was most prevalent in the United States, Germany, and other individualistic cultures, while the insecure/resistant pattern was most prevalent in Japan, Israel, and other collectivist cultures. Researchers interested in culture have also looked at the attachment patterns of various racial/ethnic groups in the United States and have found that patterns are similar across different groups (Brandell & Ringel, 2007). Finally, there is evidence that adult attachment patterns are cross-culturally universal (van IJzendoorn & Bakermans-Kranenburg, 2010).

**Early Separation from Primary Caregivers**:  Much of the research on the effects of the separation of infants from their primary caregivers has looked at the impact of hospitalization and found that the types and severity of the effects are related to the infant’s age. For example, in a frequently cited study, Schaffer and Callender (1959) observed the behaviors of healthy infants 12 months of age and younger who were hospitalized for elective surgery. They found that, for babies 7 months of age and younger, separation from their mothers caused little distress. These babies quickly adjusted to the hospital and hospital staff and accepted changes in routines, and they acted similarly at home before and after hospitalization. In contrast, babies who were over 7 months of age at the time of hospitalization exhibited a great deal of stranger anxiety in the hospital and were not soothed by nurses. Also, when they returned home, these infants exhibited a number of disturbances: They clung excessively to their mothers and cried vigorously when separated from them, and many experienced sleep and appetite disturbances. Based on these results, Schaffer and Callender concluded that “the critical period, when separation from the mother is experienced as a traumatic event, does not commence until after the middle of the first year of life, and that consequently in those cases where there is a choice, hospitalization should be arranged to occur before the crucial age is reached” (p. 528).

**Early Emotions:** Research has found that children’s emotions emerge in a predictable order (Lewis, 2000). From birth to about 18 months of age children exhibit *primary emotions*: Shortly after birth they exhibit contentment, interest, and distress which expand at about six months to include joy, surprise, sadness, disgust, anger, and fear. Thereafter, children exhibit *secondary (self-conscious) emotions* as a result of the development of self-awareness: At 18 to 24 months, they begin to exhibit envy, empathy, and embarrassment which expand at 30 to 36 months to include shame, guilt, and pride. 
R**ecognition of Facial Expressions of Emotion:** Recognition of facial expressions of emotion is also known as facial emotion recognition and facial expression recognition and refers to the ability to perceive emotions in facial expressions. Researchers have studied how facial emotion recognition develops during infancy using (a) looking-time paradigms that are based on the assumption that “increases or decreases in infants’ visual attention can be used to infer infants’ emotion abilities and knowledge” (Ruba & Pollak, 2020, p. 507) and (b) event-related-potential (ERP) paradigms that provide information about infants’ neural responses to facial expressions of emotion. Some studies have found that, soon after birth, infants can discriminate between some facial expressions (e.g., happy and sad), but other studies have found that infants do not reliably discriminate between facial expressions until they are 5 to 7 months of age (e.g., Leppanen & Nelson, 2013; Safar & Moulson, 2017). The research has also found that infants begin to categorize facial expressions of emotion at about 7 months of age, which means they are able to recognize the similarity of an emotion expression (e.g., happiness) on the faces of multiple models even when there are differences in irrelevant characteristics such as the age or gender of the models or the intensity of their expressions. A consistent finding of the research is that infants show a shift in their preferences for particular emotion expressions by 7 months of age: Prior to this age, they exhibit increased attention to happy facial expressions but this changes at about 7 months to increased attention to fearful facial expressions. One explanation for this “fear bias” is that fearful expressions are unfamiliar to younger infants, which also helps explain why this bias declines at about 12 months of age when infants have had more exposure to fearful expressions (Xie et al., 2019). Finally, between 10 and 18 months of age, infants show understanding of the affective meaning of facial expressions. For example, Reschke et al. (2017) used the violation-of-expectation paradigm (a type of looking-time paradigm) to assess the ability of 12-month-olds to match facial expressions with eliciting events and found that the infants expected a person to express happiness (versus anger) after receiving a toy and sadness or anger (versus happiness) after fighting over a toy. 

**Emotions in Adulthood:** Researchers interested in emotions in adulthood have investigated age-related changes in the quality of emotions and emotional memory and the effects of guilt and shame on behavior.

1. **Age-Related Changes in Positive and Negative Emotions:** Longitudinal and cross-sectional research has found that negative emotions decrease over time from the early 20s to the mid-60s, while positive emotions remain stable or increase during this period (e.g., Charles & Carstensen, 2010). Research on emotions after the mid-60s has produced less consistent results, with some studies finding negative emotions either increasing, decreasing, or remaining stable after this age. One explanation for this inconsistency is that emotions are affected by health status. Kunzmann, Little, and Smith (2000) initially found that negative emotions remained stable and positive emotions decreased with age for individuals 70 to 100 years of age. However, when they controlled for functional health impairments, the results were more consistent with changes that occur prior to the mid-60s: They found that, for their sample, increasing age was associated with decreasing negative emotions and increasing positive emotions.

2. **Age-Related Changes in Emotional Memory:** Researchers interested in age-related changes in emotional memory have identified a *positivity effect*, which is the tendency of older adults to prefer, attend to, and remember more positive information than younger adults do. For example, Mather and Carstensen (2005) found that, when older adults were asked to recall positive and negative memories from the past, they recalled more memories associated with positive emotions. Socioemotional selectivity theory (SST) is described below and is one of the theories that’s used to explain the positivity effect. It predicts that older adults tend to be motivated more than younger adults by emotional gratification and, therefore, are more likely to focus on and recall positive information more than negative information.

3. **Effects of Shame and Guilt:** The self-conscious emotions include shame and guilt. Although both involve self-blame, they have different targets: Shame occurs when “people feel badly about *themselves*,” while guilt occurs when people “feel badly about a specific behavior – i.e., something they’ve *done*” (Tangney, 2007, p. 403). In other words, the focus of shame is on oneself, while the focus of guilt is on one’s behavior. A number of studies have been conducted to identify the effects of shame and guilt. For example, Lickel and colleagues (2014) investigated the role of shame and guilt on the motivation of young adults to change as a person. In their study, participants were asked to write about an event they had experienced that made them feel shame or guilt and then to answer several questions about the motivations engendered by that event. Results indicated that recalling both guilt- and shame-eliciting events induced the motivation to change the self but that motivation was stronger for shame. In contrast, the research has found that guilt increases motivation to engage in corrective or reparative behaviors (e.g., apologies, compensation) toward victims (e.g., Donohue & Tully, 2019). 

**Aggression:**  One way to categorize aggression is in terms of its function as either instrumental or hostile. *Instrumental aggression* is also referred to as proactive aggression, and its function is to fulfill a need or desire (e.g., to get attention or obtain a desired object). *Hostile aggression* is driven by anger and is done to hurt someone. When it is provoked, hostile aggression is also known as reactive aggression. As described by Berk (2018), instrumental and hostile aggression can take one of three forms: physical aggression (e.g., hitting, kicking, or destroying another person’s property), verbal aggression (e.g., threats of physical harm or name-calling), or relational aggression (damaging another person’s social relationships through social exclusion or spreading of malicious gossip). Studies have shown that aggression changes in predictable ways during early childhood: Physical instrumental aggression is usually evident by 1 year of age, peaks around 2 years of age, and continues to be the dominant form of aggression until about 4 years of age when verbal and relational hostile aggression begin to become more common (e.g., Bergin & Bergin, 2016; Kuther, 2019; Shaffer & Kipp, 2010).
1. **Causes of Aggression:**  Explanations for aggressive behavior in children include the following:

Research by Patterson and his colleagues (Patterson, Reid, & Dishion, 1992) led to their conclusion that families of highly aggressive boys are characterized by escalating coercive interactions and poor parental monitoring of children’s activities. Their *coercive family interaction model* proposes that (a) parents learn they can, at least temporarily, stop their children’s misbehavior with threats and physical punishment; (b) children learn aggressive behaviors from their parents and that they can stop their parents’ behaviors by ignoring them or having a temper tantrum; and (c) aggressive parent-child interactions escalate over time. These investigators also found that parents are most likely to use coercive discipline when the family is experiencing a high level of stress, the child has a difficult temperament, and the parents have certain personality characteristics. They developed their Parent Management Training – Oregon Model (PMTO) to help stop the coercive family cycle. It involves providing parents with therapy to help them deal better with stress and teaching them effective parenting skills. 

Crick and Dodge’s (1994) *social information processing model* describes a person’s response to provocation as involving six steps and proposes that aggressive behavior in children is due to deficiencies and biases at each step: (a) *Encoding of cues:* Aggressive children tend to focus on aspects of the provoker’s behavior that suggest a hostile intention and ignore other aspects. (b) *Interpretation of cues:* Aggressive children have a hostile attribution bias that causes them to automatically assume that a provoker had a hostile intent in ambiguous social situations. (c) *Clarification of goals:* Aggressive children identify retaliation as their goal. (d) *Response search:* Aggressive children identify few options for responding, and most of them involve aggressive behavior. (e) *Response decision:* Aggressive children choose an aggressive response because they believe it will have favorable outcomes. (f) *Behavioral enactment:* Aggressive children act aggressively.

2. **Violent Videogames and Aggression:** Violent videogames have been established as a contributor to aggressive and violent behavior, especially for adolescents and young adults. For example, the APA Task Force on Media Violence (2015) conducted a meta-analysis of the research and found that the studies have found “a consistent relation between violent video game use and increases in aggressive behavior, aggressive cognitions, and aggressive affect and decreases in prosocial behavior, empathy, and sensitivity to aggression” (p. 11). The Task Force concluded that the greater the exposure to violent videogames, the higher the level of aggression and that the relationship between violent videogames and aggression remains when known risk factors for aggression (e.g., antisocial personality traits, parental conflict, child and parent depression) are statistically controlled. The Task Force also pointed out that research that included children (especially those under 10 years of age), females, and members of ethnic minority groups is limited and, therefore, caution is necessary when drawing conclusions about the effects of violent videogames on the aggressive behaviors of members of these populations. 
3. **Interventions for Aggression:**  Parent training has been found useful for improving parent-child interactions and reducing children’s aggression and other externalizing behavior problems (e.g., Mingebach, Kamp-Becker, Christiansen, & Weber, 2018). However, there’s evidence that their effectiveness is moderated by several factors including the initial severity of the child’s symptoms and the family’s socioeconomic status. For example, a meta-analysis of the research by Leijten, Raaijmakers, Castro, and Matthys (2013) found that parent training programs were equally effective for economically disadvantaged and nondisadvantaged families immediately posttreatment when the child’s initial problems were severe, but disadvantaged families benefited less than advantaged families when the child’s initial symptoms were mild. In addition, at the one-year follow-up, disadvantaged families had poorer outcomes than advantaged families regardless of the initial severity of the child’s symptoms.

4. **Culture of Honor:** Research has shown that attitudes reflecting a “culture of honor” are more prevalent in the southern than the northern United States and are characterized by concerns about maintaining one’s status and reputation and a willingness to respond to threats to one’s honor with aggressive and violent behavior. The greater acceptance of violence in southern states has been attributed to several factors including warmer temperatures and greater poverty in the South, the tradition of slavery, and a southern economy in the 17th and 18th centuries that was based on herding. With regard to the latter, Nisbett (1993) argues that herding (a) “predisposes people to a violent stand toward their fellows … because their livelihoods can be lost in an instant by the theft of their herds” and (b) cultivates “a posture of extreme vigilance toward any act that might be perceived as threatening … [a tendency to] respond with sufficient force to frighten the offender and the community into recognizing that they are not to be trifled with” (p. 442). Nisbett points out that the persistence of culture-of-honor norms in the South is evident in current laws and social policies (e.g., looser gun control laws and less restrictive self-defense statutes) and a higher rate of homicides that arise from arguments involving threats to honor. Research has also found that, compared to their Northern counterparts, White Southern men react to an insult with higher levels of anger and larger increases in cortisol and testosterone and are more likely to endorse the use of violence in response to threats to themselves, family members, or property and criticize men who do not do so (Cohen & Nisbett, 1994; Nisbett, 1993).

**Social Relationships in Childhood:** Researchers interested in social relationships during childhood have investigated childhood play, friendships in childhood and adolescence, and peer status.

1. **Play:** Some of the earliest studies on childhood play were conducted by Parten (1932) who classified the play of preschool children as nonsocial and social: *Nonsocial play* includes unoccupied play in which the child engages in aimless movements and activities, solitary play in which the child plays alone, and onlooker play in which the child watches other children play and talks to them but doesn’t participate. *Social play* includes parallel play in which the child plays next to other children and shares toys but doesn’t interact with them, associative play in which the child interacts with other children but without shared goals, and cooperative play in which the child interacts with other children to achieve a common goal.
Gender segregation is the tendency of children to choose playmates of the same gender and has been attributed to a combination of biological, cognitive, and cultural factors. Studies have found that most children begin to prefer same-sex playmates between 2 and 3 years of age, with girls showing this preference earlier than boys (Pasterski, Golombok, & Hines, 2011). Gender segregation tends to occur even when adults encourage cross-gender play and it intensifies during early and middle childhood and then remains stable until adolescence (Rudman & Glick, 2021). 

The types of play children engage in is somewhat age-related, with unoccupied and onlooker play occurring at all ages but solitary and parallel play declining with increasing age and associative and cooperative play increasing with increasing age (Sigelman & Rider, 2012).
2. **Friendships in Childhood and Adolescence:**  According to Selman (1980), developmental changes in the understanding of friendships are related to changes in social perspective-taking and can be described in terms of five overlapping levels:  

**Level 0/Momentary Playmates – “I Want It My Way?” (about 3 to 6 years of age)**: During this stage, children say their friends are children they currently play with or who live nearby.   

**Level 1/One-Way Assistance – “What’s In It For Me?” (about 5 to 9 years of age)**: Children in this stage recognize that friendships extend beyond their current activities and say friends are children who do nice things for them. However, they don’t think about what they contribute to the friendship.  
**Level 2/Two-Way, Fair Weather Cooperation – “By The Rules” (about 7 to 12 years of age)**: Children in this stage are concerned about fairness and reciprocity in friendships. They believe if they do something nice for a friend, the friend should do something nice for them – and, if that doesn’t happen, the friendship is likely to end. 

**Level 3/Intimate, Mutually Shared Relationships – “Caring and Sharing” (8 to 15 years of age)**: During this stage, children and adolescents share secrets and do things for each other because they genuinely care about their friends. They’re likely to feel betrayed when a best friend chooses to spend time with someone else. 

**Level 4/Mature Friendship – “Friends Through Thick and Thin” (12 years of age and older)**: Children and adolescents in this stage value emotional closeness with friends. They accept differences between themselves and their friends and are less likely to feel threatened when a close friend has other friendships. 

3. **Peer Status:**  Children who are unpopular with their peers can be described as rejected or neglected (Berk, 2010): *Rejected-aggressive children* tend to be hyperactive and impulsive, are often in conflict with their peers, have trouble regulating their emotions, and misinterpret the intentions of others as hostile. *Rejected-withdrawn children* tend to be submissive and passive, have a high degree of social anxiety, and have negative expectations about how they’ll be treated by others. *Neglected children* have low rates of interaction with peers, rarely engage in disruptive behaviors, and are usually well-adjusted. Research on outcomes for unpopular children has found that they tend to be worse for children who are actively rejected by their peers. These children not only express greater loneliness and have lower self-esteem but are also less likely than neglected children to experience an improvement in their peer status when they change schools or social groups (Coie & Kupersmidt, 1983).

**Social Relationships in Adulthood:** Carstensen’s (1993) *socioemotional selectivity theory* proposes that the motivation for friendships is related to people’s perceptions about the amount of time left in life. People who view time as unlimited are future-oriented, and knowledge-seeking is their primary motivation for friendships. These individuals prefer friends who provide them with information that might be useful in the future. In contrast, people who view time as limited are present-oriented, and emotional closeness is their primary motivation. They are more selective about who they have as friends and prefer friendships that evoke positive feelings and avoid those that evoke negative feelings. Older adults are more likely than younger adults to perceive time as limited and prefer emotionally close friends, but there are exceptions. For instance, younger adults who have a life-threatening illness tend to view time as limited and prefer emotionally close friends (Carstensen & Fredrickson, 1998).

Carstensen and her colleagues (Carstensen, Gottman, & Levenson, 1995) have also investigated *emotion regulation* in happily and unhappily married couples by comparing the communication styles of older dissatisfied married couples, older satisfied married couples, middle-aged dissatisfied married couples, and middle-aged satisfied married couples while the couples discussed problematic issues in their relationships. Perhaps contrary to what might be expected, the results of their research indicated that unhappily married older couples were less likely than other couples to engage in “negative start-up” – i.e., less likely to respond to their partners’ expressions of neutral affect with expressions of anger, disgust, or other negative emotions. The authors propose that this difference may be due to the fact that unhappily married older couples have learned to use strategies that limit the experience of negative emotions.

**Successful Aging:** Successful aging “is a multidimensional and integrative state of being, encompassing the domains of physical, psychological, functional, and social health” (Berte & Patterson, 2008, p. 82). Frequently cited models of successful aging include the following: (a) Rowe and Kahn’s (1987) *three-component model* identifies three factors that are essential for successful aging: reducing the risk for disease and disease-related disability, maintaining high cognitive and physical functioning, and staying actively engaged with life by being connected to others and involved in productive activities. According to Rowe and Kahn, the relationship between these factors is hierarchical: The absence of disease is necessary for good cognitive and physical functioning which, in turn, are necessary for active engagement with life. These investigators also propose that people have some control over the three factors through their diet, exercise, and other lifestyle choices. (b) Baltes and Baltes’s (1990) *selective optimization with compensation (SOC) model* focuses on three adaptative processes – selection, optimization, and compensation – that can be used to minimize age-related losses (e.g., declines in sensory acuity and cognitive processing speed) and maximize age-related gains (e.g., increases in knowledge and wisdom): Selection involves narrowing goals and activities to those that are of greatest interest and importance. Optimization involves acquiring or strengthening the skills needed to achieve selected goals and activities. Compensation involves obtaining assistance (e.g., services, devices) that will help achieve selected goals and activities.
