# APA Ethics Code Standards 9 & 10


**Assessment Techniques and Results:** Standard 9 provides ethical requirements for the use of assessment techniques and the interpretation and explanation of their results. 

(a) Standards 9.01(a) and (b) require psychologists to ensure that the conclusions and recommendations they derive from assessment results are based on sufficient information and to ordinarily “provide opinions of the psychological characteristics of individuals only after they have conducted an examination of the individuals adequate to support their statements or conclusions.” Standard 9.01(b) also states that, when personal assessment of an individual is not feasible, psychologists communicate any limitations of their conclusions and decisions about that individual. For example, when psychologists’ conclusions about the mental competence of an individual are based, to some extent, on the results of an evaluation conducted by another mental health professional, they should explain why it was necessary to use those results and how doing so may have affected their conclusions.

(b) Standard 9.02(a) requires psychologists to use assessment techniques “in a manner and for purposes that are appropriate in light of the research on or evidence of the usefulness and proper application of the techniques.” This includes using tests for purposes that are supported by empirical evidence and administering and scoring tests using standardized procedures. Standard 9.02(b) states that psychologists use tests “whose validity and reliability have been established for use with members of the population tested.” However, it also states that, “when such validity or reliability has not been established, psychologists describe the strengths and limitations of test results and interpretations.” 

Fisher (2017) points out that testing procedures may require adaptation when a test is administered to examinees with disabilities, and she states that Standard 9.02(a) permits deviating from standardized procedures when doing so is supported by research or other evidence. Adaptation of testing procedures is also addressed in the *Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing* (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014). It describes adaptations as changes made to a test to increase its access for certain test takers that can take the form of accommodations or modifications: *Accommodations* are “relatively minor changes to the presentation and/or format of the test, test administration, or response procedures that maintain the original construct and result in scores comparable to those on the original test” (pp. 58-59). Using a large-print or braille version of a test of content knowledge for visually impaired examinees is an example of an accommodation. *Modifications* are changes to test content and/or testing conditions that alter the construct to some extent and result in scores that do not have the same meaning as scores on the original test. As an example, when a reading test that evaluates reading comprehension and ability to decode written language is modified by providing a screen reader for examinees with dyslexia, the construct measured by the test is altered for those examinees. Accommodations and modifications should be documented in test reports along with a description of how they affect the validity of the interpretation of test scores. In addition, the *Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing* recommends that modified tests be treated “like a newly developed assessment that needs to adhere to the test standards for validity, reliability/precision, fairness, and so forth” (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014, p. 67). 

Finally, administering tests designed to be administered in-person via telepsychology is addressed in Guideline 8 of the *Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology* (APA Task Force on Telepsychology, 2024). It encourages psychologists "to be knowledgeable about and account for the impacts and limitations on test administration and interpretation when these [in-person] psychological tests and other assessment procedures are conducted via telepsychology" (p. 16). It also states that psychologists should strive to maintain standards of test reliability, validity, and utility and ensure test integrity and security. Wright and colleagues (2020) also provide recommendations for administering in-person tests via telepsychology. For example, they suggest using wider confidence intervals when interpreting test scores in this situation because the margin of error is increased whenever scores are derived from nonstandardized administration procedures. They also stress the importance of noting in test feedback and reports how assessment procedures were altered and how the alterations might affect the interpretation of test scores.

(c) Allowing unqualified individuals to use psychological assessment techniques is prohibited by Standard 9.07, except when doing so is for the purpose of training the individual and the individual is provided with appropriate supervision.

(d) Standard 9.08(a) prohibits psychologists from basing decisions and recommendations on test results “that are outdated for the current purpose,” and Standard 9.08(b) prohibits psychologists from basing decisions and recommendations on tests “that are obsolete and not useful for the current purpose.” An implication of these requirements is that it may be acceptable to use outdated tests results and obsolete tests when they are appropriate for the purpose of a current evaluation. This issue is addressed by Bush and colleagues (2018) who state that the publication of a revised version of a test does not necessarily make the previous version obsolete or make its use unethical. They point out that “continued use of a prior version in some instances can be more consistent with the ethical responsibility to provide services that are beneficial” (p. 323). For example, it’s likely to be more appropriate to use the newest version of a test when there are significant cohort changes in test scores over time (e.g., population changes in IQ scores). However, it’s likely to be more appropriate to use the previous version of a test that has norms for an examinee’s racial/ethnic group when the new version does not yet have norms for that group. Finally, note that the Ethics Code and *Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing* do not provide guidelines for determining when a test or test results become obsolete or indicate an acceptable length of time for adopting a revised version of a test.

(e) The use of automated and other test scoring and interpretation services is addressed in Standard 9.09, which requires psychologists to choose these services on the basis of their validity and other relevant factors. This standard also states that psychologists “retain responsibility for the appropriate application, interpretation, and use of assessment instruments, whether they score and interpret such tests themselves or use automated or other services.”
(f) Standard 9.10 states that psychologists must take “reasonable steps” to explain assessment results to the individual or his/her representative unless the situation precludes this requirement which may occur, for example, when the assessment is part of employment screening or forensic evaluation. However, in these situations, the reason for preclusion should be discussed with the person prior to assessment.

**Informed Consent for Assessment:** Informed consent for assessment is addressed in Standard 9.03. Standard 9.03(a) states that, during the informed consent process, a person should be provided with information about “the nature and purpose of the assessment, fees, involvement of third parties, and limits of confidentiality” and given an opportunity to ask and receive answers to his/her questions. This standard notes that informed consent is ordinarily obtained but that there are exceptions – e.g., informed consent is unnecessary when the assessment is mandated by law or governmental regulations (e.g., when it is court-ordered) and when “informed consent is implied because testing is being conducted as a routine educational, institutional, or organizational activity.”

Standard 9.03(b) states that, when the person to be assessed has “questionable capacity to consent” or when the assessment is mandated, the person should be provided with information about the general nature and purpose of the assessment in “reasonably understandable” language. In her discussion of Standard 9.03(b), Fisher (2017) notes that describing the purpose of a test of malingering to an examinee might compromise the test’s validity but that deceiving the examinee about the purpose might violate the examinee’s autonomy rights. She states that, as a resolution of this dilemma, “current standards of practice support communicating to … [examinees] that measures will be used to assess the examinee’s honesty and efforts to do well, without describing the particularities of the tests that will be used to measure exaggeration or other elements of malingering” (p. 361). Finally, Standard 9.03(c) states that, when using the services of an interpreter to assist with the assessment of a client, psychologists obtain informed consent from the client for use of the interpreter, make sure that confidentiality of test results and test security are maintained, and include in their feedback and reports a description of any limitations of the obtained data resulting from use of an interpreter.

**Test Data and Test Materials:** Standard 9.04 describes “test data” as including “raw and scaled scores, client/patient responses to test questions or stimuli, and psychologists’ notes and recordings concerning client/patient statements and behavior during an examination.” It also states that, while psychologists ordinarily release test data to the client or the person identified in the client’s authorization, they may refrain from doing so to protect the client or others from harm or misuse of the data as long as this is permitted by law. For example, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) allows covered entities to withhold test data when its release is reasonably likely to endanger the life or physical safety of the client or other person [45 CFR 164.524(a)(3)]. 

Standard 9.11 describes “test materials” as including “manuals, instruments, protocols, and test questions or stimuli.” It also requires psychologists to “make reasonable efforts” to protect the integrity and security of test materials in ways that are consistent with legal requirements and contractual obligations. As noted by Fisher (2017), this requirement does not prohibit psychologists from discussing an individual test item with a client when doing so will help the client understand his/her test results.

**Informed Consent for Therapy:** Standard 10.01(a) requires psychologists to obtain informed consent from therapy clients “as early as is feasible in the therapeutic relationship.” It also states that clients should be informed about “the nature and anticipated course of therapy, fees, involvement of third parties, and limits of confidentiality” and given an opportunity to ask and receive answers to their questions. With regard to the nature of therapy, factors to address during the informed consent process include the general goals of treatment, its potential benefits and negative side effects or risks (e.g., emotional discomfort), and information about the appointment schedule (e.g., weekly) and duration of each therapy session. While Standard 10.01(a) does not describe informed consent as an ongoing process, experts emphasize that it should be viewed as a continuous process rather than a one-time event. As noted by Barnett and Behnke (2013), the informed consent process “should continue throughout the [therapeutic] relationship with additional information being shared and discussed whenever substantive changes to the existing agreement and services provided are anticipated” (p. 541). 

Standard 10.01(b) addresses the use of treatments “for which generally recognized techniques and procedures have not been established.” It states that, in this situation, psychologists must inform clients of “the developing nature of the treatment, the potential risks involved, alternative treatments that may be available, and the voluntary nature of their participation.” Standard 10.01(c) states that, “when the therapist is a trainee and the legal responsibility for the treatment provided resides with the supervisor, the client … [must be] informed that the therapist is in training and is being supervised and … given the name of the supervisor.” 

Informed consent for telepsychology is addressed in Guideline 2 of APA’s *Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology* (APA Task Force on Telepsychology, 2024). It states that “psychologists strive to obtain and document informed consent, recognizing the distinctive considerations associated with the provision of telepsychology services” (p. 9). These considerations include the potential limitations of telepsychology, such as the possibility of disruptions of sessions due to technology failure and the increased risk for breaches of confidentiality. Guideline 2 also encourages psychologists to adopt a “dual consent approach” that involves obtaining consent for both in-person psychological services and services delivered via telepsychology. Elsewhere, APA notes that, when psychologists switch from in-person therapy to telepsychology or vice versa, they should provide clients with a second informed consent form as an addendum to the initial form that addresses issues relevant to the second type of therapy (APA Legal and Regulatory Affairs Staff, 2021).

**Providing Therapy to Clients Served by Others:** Standard 10.04 states that psychologists must “proceed with caution and sensitivity to the therapeutic issues” when asked to provide services to a person who is receiving services from another mental health professional. The appropriate action in this situation depends on the nature of the services being provided by the other professional. For example, if a client tells you during her first session that she’s seeing another therapist for the same problem because she thinks doing so will help her resolve the problem more quickly, you would probably not want to continue seeing the client. In contrast, when a client is seeking therapy from you to deal with the recent death of his father and tells you he’s also in group therapy for his long-standing gambling problem, it would be acceptable for you to accept him as a client. However, in this situation, you’d want to obtain the client’s authorization to consult with the other therapist to coordinate the two treatments.

**Sexual Intimacies:** Sexual intimacies with current and former clients are addressed in Standard 10.05 and 10.08. Standard 10.05 prohibits sexual intimacies with current clients under any circumstances, while Standard 10.08 prohibits sexual intimacies with former clients for at least two years following termination of therapy and then only in the “most unusual circumstances.” Standard 10.08 also states that therapists “bear the burden of demonstrating” that a sexual relationship with a former client is not exploitative, which requires considering the following factors: 

(1) the amount of time that has passed since therapy terminated; (2) the nature, duration, and intensity of the therapy; (3) the circumstances of termination; (4) the client’s/patient’s personal history; (5) the client’s/patient’s current mental status; (6) the likelihood of adverse impact on the client/patient; and (7) any statements or actions made by the therapist during the course of therapy suggesting or inviting the possibility of a post-termination sexual or romantic relationship with the client/patient.  

Finally, Standard 10.06 prohibits psychologists from engaging in sexual intimacies with “individuals they know to be” relatives and significant others of current therapy clients, while Standard 10.07 prohibits psychologists from providing therapy to individuals they have been sexually involved with in the past. 
**Termination of Therapy:**  Standard 10.10 requires psychologists to terminate therapy when it becomes clear that a client no longer needs or is benefiting from it. However, as noted by Fisher (2022), this does not mean that a therapist and client cannot reevaluate the client’s progress and determine if there’s a valid reason to continue therapy (e.g., if there are additional treatment goals to address). Standard 10.10 also requires psychologists to “provide pretermination counseling and suggest alternative service providers as appropriate” but describes an exception to this requirement: Psychologists may terminate therapy without pretermination counseling and referrals “when threatened or otherwise endangered by the client/patient or another person with whom the client/patient has a relationship.”   

Guidelines for referral decisions are not provided in the standards of the APA Ethics Code but are provided in its aspirational guidelines. For example, Principle B states that “psychologists consult with, refer to, or cooperate with other professionals and institutions to the extent needed to serve the best interests of those with whom they work.” In other words, the client’s welfare is the top priority when making referrals to alternative services. Finally, note that a specific number of referrals is <u>not</u> specified in the APA Ethics Code but that some experts recommend giving clients a minimum of three referrals (e.g., Knapp et al., 2013).

