# APA Ethics Code Standards 5 & 6


**Advertising and Other Public Statements:** Standard 5 (Advertising and Other Public Statements) of the Ethics Code addresses public statements, client testimonials, and in-person solicitation of business.

1. **Public Statements:** Standards 5.01, 5.02, and 5.04 cover public statements about psychologists’ professional services made by themselves and others. Standard 5.01 states that “psychologists do not knowingly make public statements that are false, deceptive, or fraudulent concerning their research, practice, or other work activities or those of persons or organizations with which they are affiliated.” This prohibition applies to a psychologist’s training, experience, credentials, services, fees, and so on and to a variety of statements including those made in advertisements, licensing applications, resumes, directory listings, and lectures. Standard 5.01 also states that psychologists can claim as credentials for their mental health services only degrees that “were earned from a regionally accredited educational institution or … were the basis for psychology licensure.” Fisher (2017) interprets this requirement to mean that psychologists can use only two types of degrees as evidence of their qualifications to provide mental health services:  a doctoral degree in psychology from an accredited educational institution or a degree from a nonaccredited educational institution for a program that has been approved by the state as qualifying psychologists for licensure.  

Standard 5.02 states that psychologists are responsible for public statements made by others they have retained to “promote their professional practice, products, or activities.” It also states that psychologists “do not compensate employees of press, radio, television, or other communication media in return for publicity in a news item” and that psychologists must clearly identify paid advertisements for their services as such. Standard 5.04 addresses media presentations and states that, when psychologists provide “public advice or comment via print, Internet, or other electronic transmission … [their statements must be] based on their professional knowledge, training, or experience.” In addition, psychologists must not indicate that an interaction with an individual via the media establishes a professional relationship.

2. **Client Testimonials:** Standard 5.05 prohibits psychologists from soliciting “testimonials from current therapy clients/patients or other persons who because of their particular circumstances are vulnerable to undue influence.”

3. **In-Person Solicitation of Business:** Standard 5.06 prohibits psychologists from engaging “in uninvited in-person solicitation of business from actual or potential therapy clients/patients or other persons who because of their particular circumstances are vulnerable to undue influence.” It excludes from this prohibition encouraging family members or others to participate in therapy to benefit a current therapy client and providing disaster relief or community outreach services.

**Record Keeping and Fees:** Standard 6 (Record Keeping and Fees) of the Ethics Code provides ethical requirements for professional records and financial arrangements.

1. **Maintaining, Disseminating, and Disposing of Records:** Maintaining, disseminating, and disposing of records are addressed in Standards 6.01 and 6.02. Standard 6.01 identifies reasons why psychologists must create, maintain, and dispose of records in appropriate ways – e.g., to facilitate the transfer of services, to ensure the accuracy of billing, and to comply with legal and institutional requirements. Regarding forensic records, Kalmbach and Lyons (2006) note that “maintaining accurate records is important in all professional practice … [but] forensic practice is held to a higher standard than general practice” (p.280): Forensic records are usually more detailed than clinical records are and should include all notes and materials that were used to form an opinion. In addition, forensic psychologists should keep in mind that “with the exception of relevant client/patient privilege, the entirety of the psychologist’s records created or used in a case is subject to discovery” (Fisher, 2017, p. 234).

Standard 6.02 provides guidelines for maintaining the confidentiality of records. Standard 6.02(b) states that psychologists “use coding or other techniques to avoid the inclusion of personal identifiers” when entering confidential information in databases or other record systems that permit access to unauthorized individuals. Techniques for protecting client confidentiality and privacy when using digital technologies include encrypting all client records and communications, using HIPAA-compliant cloud providers, using two-factor authentication, working with air-gapped computers (computers that are separated from networked data and internet access), and including information on risks associated with digital data storage and communication in informed consent discussions and documents (Lustgarten, 2016). Standard 6.02(c) requires psychologists to have plans for transferring client records and maintaining their confidentiality in the event of planned or unplanned withdrawal from practice. Methods for doing so include having a professional will, having an arrangement with a responsible colleague or professional association to manage the records, and instructing a spouse or executor on how to seek advice for the management of records (Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 2016).  

Information about the minimum duration of time for maintaining professional records is provided in Guideline 7 of APA’s (2007) *Record Keeping Guidelines*. It recommends that, in the absence of a superseding legal or institutional requirement, psychologists “consider retaining full records until 7 years after the last date of service delivery for adults or until 3 years after a minor reaches the age of majority, whichever is later.” It also states that psychologists may want to retain records for a longer period, depending on the situation and the pros and cons of doing so.

2. **Fees and Financial Arrangements:** Standard 6.04 requires psychologists to reach an agreement with clients “as early as feasible” about fees and billing arrangements. This includes discussing fees for therapy sessions, billing and payment schedules, charges for missed appointments, issues related to third-party payors, and the policy for unpaid fees. With regard to the latter, Standard 6.04(e) states that psychologists may use collection agencies and other legal measures to collect unpaid fees but “must first inform the person that such measures will be taken and provide that person an opportunity to make prompt payment.” Of course, only limited information must be provided to a collection agency – i.e., the client’s name, address, and phone number; the dates of the services; and the amount due for those services. Although sliding fee scales based on a client’s income are not addressed in the Ethics Code, they are generally viewed as being acceptable as long as they’re applied consistently and equitably and are consistent with state laws. Providing the first therapy session for free to new clients is also not addressed in the Ethics Code, and there’s no clear consensus about the acceptability of doing so. There’s some agreement, however, that it’s acceptable when special precautions are taken, including making sure the person understands the limited purpose of the first session (e.g., to help the person decide if he/she wants to work with the therapist) and is made aware of the fee for future sessions before attending the first session (e.g., Miranda & Marx, 2003).

Specific financial concerns and arrangements are addressed in Standards 6.03, 6.05, 6.06, and 6.07: Standard 6.03 prohibits psychologists from withholding client records when they’re needed for a client’s emergency treatment solely because the client has unpaid fees. Note that this prohibition applies to treatment and not to education, assessment, and other professional activities. Also note that withholding client records for nonpayment of fees in any situation may be illegal or inconsistent with institutional regulations. For example, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) does not allow providers to refuse to allow a patient to inspect or obtain a copy of his/her health record due to nonpayment of fees. Fees are also addressed in Paragraph 5.02 of the *Guidelines for Forensic Psychology*, which states that, “because of the threat of impartiality presented by the acceptance of contingent fees and associated legal prohibitions, forensic practitioners strive to avoid providing services on the basis of contingent fees” (p. 12).  
Standard 6.05 defines barter as “the acceptance of goods, services, or other nonmonetary remuneration from clients/patients in return for psychological services.” It also states that barter may be acceptable when it’s not clinically contraindicated or exploitative. Many experts discourage bartering because of its potential for negative consequences, and some suggest that bartering goods for therapy is less risky than bartering services (e.g., Woody, 1998).
Standard 6.06 requires psychologists to provide payors of their psychological services with accurate information about a client’s diagnosis, the type of services provided, and the fees that were charged. To do otherwise would not only be unethical but would also constitute fraud. For example, it would be unethical and illegal to assign a client an inaccurate diagnosis in order to receive reimbursement from an insurance company, to indicate that services were provided by a psychologist when they were actually provided by the psychologist’s supervisee, to bill an insurance company for individual therapy when group or family therapy was provided, to bill an insurance company for a client’s missed appointments, or to routinely waive client co-payments without the insurance company’s agreement with this practice. 

Standard 6.07 states that, when psychologists give or receive referral fees, the fee must be “based on the services provided … [and not] on the referral itself.”  For example, it would be unethical for a psychologist to pay a colleague a referral fee for each client the colleague refers to him unless the fee represents the actual costs of the referral – e.g., the time the colleague spent discussing the client with the psychologist and copying and forwarding the client’s file. Note that this prohibition does not apply to psychology referral services, dividing fees with another professional when the psychologist and other professional both provided services to a client, or paying employees a percentage of a client’s fee (Fisher, 2017).

