# Professional Issues


**Malpractice Claims:**  For a client to succeed in a claim of malpractice against a psychologist, four conditions must be met (Gable, 1983): (a) The psychologist must have had a professional relationship with the client that established the psychologist’s duty to conform to a professional standard of care. (b) There was a dereliction or breach of the duty on the part of the psychologist.  (c) The client suffered injury or harm as a result of this dereliction or breach. (d) The psychologist’s dereliction or breach of duty was the direct or proximate cause of the person’s harm or injury. In addition, for the client to obtain monetary compensation, the harm or injury must be measurable in economic terms. Note that the four conditions for malpractice are sometimes referred to as the “4 Ds”: duty of care, dereliction of duty, damages, and direct cause.

**Disciplinary Actions:** The Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) routinely publishes updated summaries of the reasons for disciplinary actions by state and provincial licensing boards. Its 2024 summary identifies the following as the 10 most common reasons in order from most to least common for 1974 through 2023: unprofessional conduct; sexual misconduct; negligence; non-sexual dual relationship; conviction of a crime; failure to maintain adequate or accurate records; failure to comply with continuing education or competency requirements; incompetence; improper or inadequate supervision or delegation; violation of federal or state statutes, regulations, or rules. [The definition of "unprofessional conduct" is not provided by the ASPPB but apparently includes unethical behaviors that are not included in the list as specific reasons for disciplinary action.]

**Responding to a Subpoena:** APA’s Committee on Legal Issues (2006) has provided the following guidelines for responding to a subpoena requesting you to testify about and/or provide records of a current or previous client: (1) Determine if the subpoena is legally valid. A valid subpoena includes the following (Davis, 2024): name of the court and jurisdiction; title of the matter and case docket number; names of the plaintiffs and defendants; name and contact information of the attorney who requested the subpoena; date, time, and location of the requested appearance; specific documents to be produced; and signature or seal of the judge or other official empowered to issue the subpoena. Note that a subpoena may be invalid because the court or other entity issuing the subpoena does not have jurisdiction over you or the issue or event that is the subject of the subpoena or the subpoena does not give a sufficient length of time to respond, requests privileged information, or was improperly served. (2) If the subpoena is valid, a formal response is required, but you should first contact the client to discuss the possible implications of providing the requested information. (If you believe the subpoena is invalid, the best course of action is to consult with an attorney.) (3) If the client authorizes you to release the information, you may do so. But, if the client doesn’t authorize you to provide the requested information, contact the requesting party to see if they are willing to withdraw or limit the request. (4) If the attempt to negotiate with the requester is unsuccessful, seek guidance from the court informally by letter or formally with a motion to quash the subpoena or a protective order. (5) If requested to provide information about the client in court or at a deposition and you do not have the client’s authorization to do so, assert the psychotherapist-patient privilege on the client’s behalf and reveal the information only with the client’s authorization or a court order.

**Forensic Psychology: Legal Terms:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with the following legal terms:

1. **Insanity:** Insanity is a legal term, and its definition varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In general, however, a defendant is considered “not guilty by reason of insanity” if, because of a mental disease or defect, he/she failed “to appreciate or understand that certain actions … [were] wrong in a legal or moral sense” at the time of the crime (Nairne, 2014, p. 448). In some jurisdictions, “not guilty by reason of insanity” is replaced by “guilty but insane,” “guilty but mentally ill,” or other alternative. In the United States, the insanity defense is used in only 1% of all criminal cases and is successful about 25% of the time (Bartol & Bartol, 2019). 

2. **Competency to Stand Trial:** Competency is also a legal term and refers to a defendant’s current mental status. In criminal legal proceedings, competency to stand trial evaluations are the most common type of competency evaluations and involve assessing the ability of defendants to “cooperate with their attorneys and … understand the charges and proceedings against them” (Gardner & Anderson, 2015, p. 128). Methods used to evaluate competency to stand trial include a clinical interview, a mental status exam, psychological tests (e.g., MMPI-2, WAIS-IV), review of collateral information, and competency specific tests. Other criminal competencies include competency to refuse the insanity defense, competency to plead guilty, and competency to waive the right to counsel. 

Note that competency is also addressed in civil proceedings. Evaluations of civil competencies “generally focus on an individual’s ability to understand any of the information that is relevant to making an everyday decision” (Huss, 2009, p. 197) and include assessing competency to make a will, enter into a contract, and make medical decisions.

3. **Fact vs. Expert Witness:** A *fact witness* is a person “who testifies as to what he/she has seen, heard, or otherwise observed regarding a circumstance, event, or occurrence as it actually took place.... Fact witnesses are generally not allowed to offer opinion, address issues that they do not have personal knowledge of, or respond to hypothetical situations” (APA, 2013, p. 30). Fact witnesses may provide confidential client information in legal proceedings only with the authorization of the client or a court order. In contrast, an *expert witness* is a person “who by reason of education or specialized experience possesses superior knowledge respecting a subject about which persons having no particular training are incapable of forming an accurate opinion or deducing correct conclusions” (APA, 2013, p. 30). Psychologists who have been qualified as expert witnesses by the court are allowed to offer opinions and testimony about hypothetical situations. 

**Forensic Psychology: Psychological Autopsy:** The term “psychological autopsy” was coined by Shneidman (1994) who described its primary function to be clarifying deaths that were equivocal with regard to the manner of death. La Fon (1999) subsequently distinguished between two types of psychological autopsy: *Equivocal death psychological autopsy* (EDPA) is closer to the procedure Shneidman described. It is used when the manner of a person’s death is ambiguous and involves collecting the information needed to classify the manner of death as suicide, accident, homicide, natural cause, or undetermined. *Suicide psychological autopsy* (SPA) is used to identify the psychosocial factors that contributed to a person’s suicide. SPAs are conducted for forensic, research, and clinical purposes (Knoll, 2008): In forensic investigations, SPAs help resolve questions related to insurance claims, contested wills, malpractice claims, worker’s compensation, and other legal issues. With regard to research, SPAs help identify suicide risk factors and methods of prevention. As a clinical tool, SPAs provide information that helps family members understand the deceased’s state of mind at the time of death and facilitates their grieving process. 

Psychological autopsies are often conducted by psychologists, psychiatrists, and other mental health professionals who have had training in forensic psychology and/or death investigation. Information is obtained from multiple sources, including the crime scene, medical and police records, records left by the deceased person (e.g., suicide note, letters and emails, bank accounts, employee or student records), and interviews with family members, close friends, and co-workers. The primary criticisms of the psychological autopsy are a lack of standardized procedures, limited empirical evidence for its reliability and validity, and the potential that obtained information is incomplete, inconsistent, and/or biased. Consequently, a psychological autopsy is accepted as the basis of expert testimony in some civil cases but is unlikely to be accepted in criminal cases (Costanzo & Krauss, 2021). However, despite its limitations, the psychological autopsy continues to be considered an important tool for identifying risk factors associated with suicide (e.g., Pouliot & De Leo, 2006).
**Avoiding Bias in Language:** Guidelines for avoiding bias in language are provided in the *Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association* (APA, 2020) and the *Inclusive Language Guidelines* (APA, 2023). These guidelines address the following:

**1. Gender, Gender Identity, and Pronouns:** (a) Don’t confuse gender and sex. Gender “refers to the attitudes, feelings, and behaviors that a given culture associates with a person’s biological sex” (APA, 2021, p. 56), while sex refers to biological sex assignment that typically occurs “at birth (or before during ultrasound) based on the appearance of external genitalia” (APA, 2021, p. 57). (b) Gender identity refers to a “person’s psychological sense of their gender” (APA, 2023, p. 31). Cisgender is an adjective that is used to “refer to individuals whose sex assigned at birth aligns with their gender identity” (APA, 2020, Reporting of Gender section, para. 1), while transgender is an adjective that is used to “refer to persons whose gender identity, expression, and/or role does not conform to what is culturally associated with their sex assigned at birth” (APA, 2020, Transgender and Gender-Nonconforming People section, para. 1). (c) Gender non-binary and gender non-conforming are also used to describe gender identity: Gender non-binary individuals do not identify exclusively as a man or a woman. Some non-binary people also identity as transgender. Gender non-conforming individuals are individuals whose gender identity and/or expression do not conform to traditional gender norms or stereotypes. Some gender non-conforming people also identify as cisgender or transgender. (d) When writing about a specific person, use that person’s self-identified pronouns whenever possible. When writing about a person whose self-identified pronouns are unknown or a person who is hypothetical or generic and gender is irrelevant to the context, use “they,” “them” and “their” as singular pronouns – e.g., “Each student submitted their dissertation proposal to the committee on or before the deadline.”  

2. **Sexual Orientation:** Sexual orientation is “a component of identity that includes a person’s sexual and emotional attraction to another person and the behavior and/or social affiliation that may result from this attraction” (APA, 2015, p. 862). When describing sexual orientation, avoid pejorative and inaccurate terms such as “homosexual” and “homosexuality.” Instead, use specific, identity-first terms such as “lesbian women, “gay men,” “heterosexual men and women,” and “bisexual adults.” Using abbreviations such as LGBTQIA and LGBTQIA+ is acceptable as long as they are defined and accurately represent the group being described.  

3. **Age:** Use terms that are appropriate for the ages of individuals being described. (a) For individuals 12 years of age and younger, use terms such as “child,” “boy,” and “girl.” (b) For individuals 13 to 17 years old, use terms such as “young person” and “adolescent.” (c) For those ages 18 years and older, use “adult,” “woman,” and “man.” (d) For adults ages 65 and older, use terms such as “older adult,” “older people,” and “persons 65 years of age and older.” For these individuals, avoid using such terms as “elderly,” “senior citizens,” and “the aged.” (e) Avoid using “males” and “females” as nouns except when a group includes individuals from multiple age groups.  

4. **Disability:** When describing individuals with physical, psychological, intellectual, or socioemotional impairments, avoid disrespectful and condescending language such as “alcoholic” and “AIDS victim.” Instead, use person-first language or, when preferred by the community or individual, identity-first language. “Adolescent with autism spectrum disorder” and “person with a physical disability” are examples of person-first language, and “autistic adolescent” and “visually impaired person” are examples of identity-first language. 

5. **Race/Ethnicity – General Guidelines:** (a) Capitalize racial and ethnic groups (e.g., Blacks, Whites, African Americans). (b) Don’t hyphenate names of racial and ethnic groups when used with a third term (e.g., Asian American participants). (c) Avoid using the terms “minority” or “minorities” without a modifier. Instead of “minorities” and “minority students,” use “ethnic minorities” and “racial-ethnic minority students.” (d) Make parallel comparisons among groups. Instead of “African Americans and Whites, use “African Americans and European Americans” or “Blacks and Whites.”  

6. **Race/Ethnicity – Racial and Ethnic Groups:** (a) For people of African origin, use the terms “African American” or “Black.” Alternatively, be more specific by indicating the region or nation of origin (e.g., Nigerian or Haitian). (b) For people of Asian ancestry from Asia, use the term “Asian”; for those from the United States or Canada, use “Asian American” or “Asian Canadian.” Alternatively, be more specific by indicating the region or nation of origin (e.g., Japanese or Japanese American). (c) For people who identify as Hispanic, Latino or Latina, or other related designation, use the term preferred by the individual or population. Alternatively, use “Latinx” or other inclusive term or indicate the region or nation of origin (e.g., Salvadoran or Costa Rican). (d) For people of European origin, use terms such as “European,” “European American,” and “European Canadian”; for those living in North America, “White” is also acceptable. When possible, be specific about an individual’s national or regional origin (e.g., Italian, Southern European). (e) For indigenous people, use the names they call themselves (e.g., Native American, Hawaiian Native, Pacific Islander, Alaska Native). Alternatively, the terms “Indigenous Peoples” or “First Nations” or the names of specific nations may be preferable (e.g., Cherokee, Navaho, Inuit). (f) For people of Middle East or North African origin, use the terms the individual prefers or, if a preference cannot be determined, use the term “Middle Eastern and North African” (MENA) or indicate the nation of origin. People of MENA descent who claim Arab ancestry and live in the U.S. may be referred to as “Arab Americans.”

**Responding to Negative Online Reviews:**  Unfavorable online reviews on Yelp and other websites have become a source of stress for many psychologists. The appropriate response to these reviews is not addressed in ethical guidelines but has been addressed elsewhere. For example, Chamberlin (2014) notes that it’s often not possible to get negative reviews deleted from a website unless they violate the website’s terms of service, that responding directly to negative reviews on a website is likely to violate ethical responsibilities and HIPAA’s privacy rule, and that counteracting negative reviews by soliciting and posting positive testimonials from current clients or others vulnerable to undue influence violates ethical requirements. Her recommendation is to reduce the effects of negative reviews by establishing a positive online presence – for example, by posting patient-satisfaction ratings or positive evaluations from colleagues and supervisors. She also notes that, when a psychologist receives several negative reviews, this might suggest that consultation would be useful to determine if the psychologist needs to make some changes in his/her practice.  

**Telepsychology – Interjurisdictional Practice:** Telepsychology is also known as teletherapy and telehealth and is defined in APA’s *Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology* as “the integration of telecommunication technologies with psychological services” (APA Task Force on Telepsychology, 2024, p. 3).  Interjurisdictional practice refers to providing telepsychology services across jurisdictions. For jurisdictions that are not part of PSYPACT (see below), laws governing interjurisdictional practice vary. Consequently, when jurisdictions are not part of PSYPACT, before providing telepsychology services across jurisdictions, psychologists must determine the legal requirements for telepsychology in the jurisdictions where they and the client are located at the time services will be provided (APA Services Inc., 2021). For example, some states require in-state licensure for providing telepsychology to clients permanently or temporarily located in those states, while other states allow psychologists licensed in a different state to provide telepsychology services to clients located in those states for a limited number of days.

Psychologists must consider several factors when providing telepsychology services to clients located in other jurisdictions regardless of the jurisdiction’s status with regard to PSYPACT. For example, they should be familiar with laws related to child and elder abuse reporting, the duty to warn or protect, and civil commitment in the jurisdictions where their clients are located. They must also familiarize themselves with local resources that are available to clients in emergency situations. Moreover, practitioners of telepsychology should, to the extent feasible, advertise their telepsychology services only to individuals they are legally authorized to provide those services to. This includes indicating the geographical locations where they provide online services in their ads, brochures, and professional websites (American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy, 2017). 

**PSYPACT:** The ASPPB’s Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT) is an interjurisdictional agreement that allows psychologists who have a doctoral degree in psychology and an active, unrestricted license in a compact state to legally provide professional services to clients in other compact states via telepsychology or on a temporary in-person, face-to-face basis without being licensed in those states. (A list of current PSYPACT states is available athttps://psypact.org/page/psypactmap.) 

1. **Telepsychology:** For psychologists licensed in a compact state to provide telepsychology services to clients in other compact states, they must obtain an E.Passport from the ASPPB and an Authority to Practice Interjurisdictional Telepsychology (APIT) from the PSYPACT Commission. When these have been obtained, psychologists may provide telepsychology services from their home state to clients located in any participating compact states without having to obtain a license in those states. A psychologist’s home state is the compact state where the psychologist is licensed to practice psychology and is physically located when delivering telepsychology services.

2. **Temporary Services:** For psychologists licensed in a compact state to provide services on a temporary in-person, face-to-face basis to clients in other compact states, they must obtain an Interjurisdictional Practice Certificate (IPC) from the ASPPB and a Temporary Authorization to Practice (TAP) from the PSYPACT Commission. When these have been obtained, psychologists may provide in-person, face-to-face services to clients in any compact state for up to 30 days per calendar year without obtaining additional licenses. When providing temporary services to a client in another compact state, psychologists must limit their scope of practice to the scope of practice for psychologists in the client’s state and adhere to applicable laws of that state.
**Accreditation:** Accreditation is “the process of formal evaluation of an educational program, institution, or system against defined standards by an external body for the purposes of quality assurance and enhancement” (Frank, Taber, van Zanten, Scheele, & Blouin, 2020, p. 305). In the United States, there are three types of accreditation: national, regional, and specialized. National and regional accreditation are both institutional types of accreditation, which means they apply to an entire institution and all of its programs. Specialized accreditation is also known as program accreditation and applies to (a) a particular department, school, or program (e.g., a department of psychology, a school of behavioral sciences, or a program in clinical psychology) and (b) an entire freestanding specialized institution (e.g., a professional school of psychology). Accreditation procedures vary somewhat for different accreditation agencies but are guided by federal requirements. In general, these procedures include a self-study, a peer review and site visit by an outside team, and preparation of a comprehensive report by the team. Based on the self-study and peer review and report, the accrediting agency decides to award, renew, deny, or revoke accreditation or accredit on contingency or probation. 

The APA Commission on Accreditation (APA-CoA) is the primary specialized accreditation agency in the United States for education and training in psychology. It accredits (a) doctoral programs in clinical psychology, counseling psychology, school psychology, and other developed practice areas; (b) doctoral internships in the aforementioned areas; and (c) postdoctoral residencies in the aforementioned areas and in specialty practice areas in health service psychology (e.g., clinical neuropsychology, forensic psychology). As described on the APA accreditation website, the primary purpose of APA accreditation is to assure “the public that a program has clearly defined training aims that meet professional and scientific standards that support the successful, ethical and skillful delivery of psychological service” (APA, n.d., para. 1). Its purpose is further elaborated in the *Standards for Accreditation for Health Service Psychology and Accreditation Operating Procedures*, which states that “accreditation is intended to protect the interests of students, benefit the public, and improve the quality of teaching, learning, research, and practice in health service psychology.” (APA, 2018, p. 3).

**Journal Article Reporting Standards:** The APA’s development of Journal Article Reporting Standards (JARS) followed the release of several other standards. For example, the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) was a model for JARS and was developed by medical experts as guidelines for reporting randomized control trials. JARS for quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research are available from several sources including two articles in the *American Psychologist* (Appelbaum, et al., 2018; Levitt, et al., 2018), the *Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association* (APA, 2020), and an APA website https://apastyle.apa.org/jars). JARS for quantitative research include guidelines for experimental and nonexperimental research, replication studies, studies using structural equation modeling, and meta-analyses. The guidelines list the information that should be included in a manuscript’s title page and abstract and in its introduction, methods, results, and discussion sections. For example, they indicate that the abstract for a meta-analysis should provide the following information: the study’s objectives, eligibility criteria for a study’s inclusion in the analysis, statistical and other methods used to synthesize the studies included in the analysis, the results of the meta-analysis (primary outcomes and effect sizes and confidence intervals), and conclusions.   

**Clinical Supervision:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with the ASPPB’s guidelines for clinical supervision, models of supervision, and research on the working alliance in supervision.

1. **Supervision Guidelines:** ASPPB’s (2015) *Supervision Guidelines for Education and Training Leading to Licensure as a Health Service Provider* is “built upon the concept of competency-based supervision, an approach to supervision that enhances accountability and is applicable to all supervision models” (Falender & Lee, 2015, para. 4). It identifies “the protection of and accountability to the public … [as the] paramount goals of supervision” (p. 1) and indicates that this refers to protection of the welfare of the supervisee’s clients. It also lists the following as additional goals and objectives: protecting the supervisee, acting as a gatekeeper by assessing the supervisee’s readiness for autonomous practice, focusing on the professional development of the supervisee, providing remediation to ensure the supervisee meets the criteria for competence and ethical standards, and preparing the supervisee for independent practice. In addition, the *Supervision Guidelines* states that “supervision is a discrete competency that presents unique ethical issues and challenges to supervisors and supervisees” (p. 6) and addresses several ethical issues that are especially relevant to supervision:

(a) **Competence:**  The *Supervision Guidelines* states that, to provide competent supervision, “the supervisor must be competent both in the services being provided by the supervisee and in the provision of supervision” (p. 42). It also states that, “among the ethical competencies essential for the supervisor are the values and skills involved in appropriately delegating a client to the supervisee and in the ongoing monitoring of the supervisee’s clients, as well as the monitoring of the professional development of the supervisee” (p. 43).

(b) **Confidentiality:** Supervisors should inform supervisees of the limits of confidentiality with regard to personal disclosures and evaluation and “ensure that the supervisee’s clients have been informed of the supervisee’s status as a trainee and that the supervisor is responsible for all services provided and has access to all clients’ records” (p. 44).

(c) **Multiple Relationships:** Supervisors must ordinarily avoid multiple relationships involving a supervisee “due to the potential loss of supervisor objectivity or exploitation of the supervisee” and be aware that, because of the power differential, “supervisees may not be able to refuse to engage in a multiple relationship or to withdraw once commenced” (p. 44). 

The *Supervision Guidelines* distinguishes between primary and delegated supervisors: *Primary supervisors* are psychologists who are licensed at the doctoral level in the jurisdiction where they provide supervision and have "ultimate responsibility for the services provided by supervisees and the quality of the supervised experiences” (p. 4). Their major responsibilities include (a) being available to supervisees either in-person or electronically 100% of the time when supervisees are providing professional services or arrange for the availability of an alternative qualified supervisor, (b) informing supervisees of the procedures to follow in cases of client emergencies, (c) maintaining professional boundaries by not entering into sexual relationships or other relationships with supervisees that would interfere with the supervisor’s objectivity or ability to provide effective supervision, and (d) maintaining records containing the dates of scheduled supervision sessions and summaries of these sessions until the supervisee becomes licensed or for at least 7 years following termination of supervision, whichever is longer. *Delegated supervisors* are licensed health practitioners to whom primary supervisors may delegate supervisory responsibilities. The *Supervision Guidelines* states that supervising psychologists "delegate supervision to another licensed health professional whose competence in the delegated areas has been demonstrated by previous education, training, and experience when (a) the service needs of the [supervisee's] client are beyond the area of the expertise of the supervisor, (b) the training needs of the supervisee warrant such delegation, or (c) it becomes necessary to provide for a qualified supervisor in case of interruption of supervision" (p. 10).

Finally, the *Supervision Guidelines* addresses telepsychology supervision and states that, at the practicum, doctoral, and post-doctoral levels, telepsychology supervision shall not account for more than 50% of a supervisee’s supervision at any given practicum site. It also states that interjurisdictional telepsychology supervision is not permitted except in emergency situations, that supervisors must verify a supervisee’s identity at the beginning of each contact, and that supervisors must “inform the supervisee of the risks and limitations to telepsychology supervision, including limits to confidentiality, security, and privacy” (p. 23). 

2. **Models of Supervision:** The various models of clinical supervision are categorized as psychotherapy-based, developmental, or process-based (Falender & Shafranske, 2004).

(a) **Psychotherapy-Based Supervision Models:** When using one of these models, “theoretical orientation informs the observation and selection of clinical data for discussion in supervision as well as the meanings and relevance of those data” (Falender & Shafranske, 2004, p. 9). Included in this category are psychodynamic, person-centered, and cognitive-behavioral supervision. Like cognitive-behavioral therapy, cognitive-behavioral supervision (CBS) is “goal-directed, structured, time-limited, collaborative, person-focused, confidential and active, with clear boundaries and a power-imbalance that requires to be managed ethically” (Pretorius, 2006, p.414). It also parallels cognitive-behavioral therapy in terms of its techniques (e.g., Socratic questioning, guided discovery, behavioral rehearsal) and structure. With regard to structure, each CBS session consists of the following steps (Liese & Beck, 1997): check-in, agenda setting, bridge from previous supervision session, inquiry about previously supervised therapy cases, review of homework since prior supervision session, prioritization and discussion of agenda items, assignment of new homework, supervisor’s capsule summaries, and feedback from supervisee.
(b) **Developmental Supervision Models:** Developmental models are based on the assumption that “supervisees progress through stages as they develop their clinical skills and that supervisees require different supervisory responses as the supervisees move through these stages” (Westefeld, 2009, p. 4). An example is the integrated developmental model (IDM; Stoltenberg, McNeill, & Delworth, 1998), which distinguishes between three levels of supervisee development that are characterized by different degrees of self-other awareness, motivation, and autonomy: Level 1 supervisees are focused on themselves but engage in limited self-evaluation, are high in motivation and anxious about evaluation, and are very dependent on the supervisor. For these supervisees, the focus of supervision is on developing a relationship, providing structure and support, and helping the supervisee acquire skills. Level 2 supervisees are better able to focus on their clients and exhibit empathy, have fluctuating levels of motivation and confidence, and vacillate between autonomy and dependence. For these supervisees, the supervisor should provide less structure, share responsibility with the supervisee, and provide support and constructive feedback. Level 3 supervisees are able to stay focused on a client while attending to their own reactions to the client, are consistent in terms of motivation, and are confident about their own skills and judgment. For supervisees at this level, supervisors should adopt a collegial role and foster the supervisee’s independence.  

(c) **Process-Based Models:** Process-based models are also known as social role models and “were developed to provide descriptions of the component roles, tasks, and processes within supervision and as a means to uniformly classify events occurring in supervision” (Falender & Shafranske, 2004, p. 17). An example is Bernard’s (1979, 1997) discrimination model, which distinguishes between three focus areas for supervision and three supervisor roles. The focus areas are intervention (process) skills, conceptualization skills, and personalization skills, and the supervisor roles are educator, counselor, and consultant. At any given point in time, the supervisor can adopt one of nine approaches that represent different combinations of the focus areas and roles. For example, when a supervisee would like to use exposure therapy to treat a client’s specific phobia but doesn’t have the skills to do so, this is an intervention skills problem and the supervisor would adopt the role of educator and teach the supervisee the techniques of this therapy. In contrast, when a supervisee is unaware that his client is sexually attracted to him, this is a personalization problem and the supervisor would adopt the role of counselor and help the supervisee confront his own sexuality and determine what is causing his failure to recognize the client’s sexual cues.

3. **The Working Alliance in Clinical Supervision:** Bordin (1983) is often cited as the first person to describe the supervisory (supervisor-supervisee) working alliance as being analogous to the therapeutic alliance, and he proposed that the supervisory working alliance consists of three interrelated components: mutually agreed upon supervision goals, mutually agreed upon supervision tasks, and strength of the supervisor-supervisee emotional bond. A number of studies have confirmed that the supervisory working alliance is an important contributor to supervision outcomes. For example, a meta-analysis of the research by Park et al. (2019) found positive correlations between supervisees’ perceptions of the working alliance and their self-efficacy, self-disclosure, satisfaction with supervision, and perceptions of their relationships with clients. There is also some evidence that the supervisory working alliance has an impact on the supervisee-client therapeutic relationship and client outcomes (e.g., DePue et al., 2016; DePue et al., 2020).