# Neurocognitive Disorders


This category includes delirium and mild and major neurocognitive disorders.

**Delirium:** The diagnosis of delirium requires (a) a disturbance in attention and awareness that develops over a short period of time (often hours to a few days), represents a change from baseline attention and awareness, and tends to fluctuate in severity over the course of the day plus (b) at least one additional disturbance in cognition (e.g., a memory or language impairment). Symptoms must not be better explained by another pre-existing or evolving neurocognitive disorder and must not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal (e.g., a coma). There must also be evidence that symptoms are the direct physiological consequence of a medical condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal, and/or exposure to a toxin.
Causes of delirium include a high fever, nutritional deficiency, electrolyte disturbance, renal or hepatic failure, head injury, and certain drugs and medications (e.g., alcohol, lithium, sedatives, anticholinergic drugs), and it’s most common in hospitalized older adults. Treatment involves addressing causal and contributing medical problems and reducing disorientation through environmental manipulation by, for example, providing sufficient lighting, reducing noise, and minimizing the number of visitors. In addition, haloperidol or other antipsychotic drug may help reduce agitation and psychotic symptoms. 

**Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorder:** The core feature of major and mild neurocognitive disorder (NCD) is cognitive dysfunction that’s acquired rather than developmental. *Major neurocognitive disorder* is diagnosed when there’s a significant decline from a previous level of functioning in one or more cognitive domains (e.g., executive functioning, learning and memory, social cognition) that does not occur only in the context of delirium and that interferes with the person’s independence in everyday activities. *Mild neurocognitive disorder* is diagnosed when there’s a modest decline from a previous level of functioning in one or more cognitive domains that does not occur only in the context of delirium and that does not interfere with the person’s independence in everyday activities but may require greater effort or the use of compensatory strategies. 

In the literature, a distinction is made between cortical, subcortical, and cortico-subcortical neurocognitive disorders. (a) *Cortical neurocognitive disorders* are primarily the result of damage to areas of the cerebral cortex. Memory loss is often the initial symptom of these disorders; other common symptoms are aphasia, agnosia, apraxia, poor insight, and impaired judgment. Included in this category are NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal NCD. (b) The *subcortical neurocognitive disorders* are primarily the result of damage to the basal ganglia, thalamus, and brainstem. The primary symptoms are slowed cognitive processes, apathy, depression, and psychomotor retardation (e.g., dysarthric speech, gait disturbances). Included in this category are NCD due to Huntington’s disease, NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, NCD due to HIV infection, and some forms of vascular NCD. (c) The *cortico-subcortical neurocognitive disorders* involve damage in the connections between cortical and subcortical areas of the brain, with symptoms depending on the specific areas that are affected. This category includes some types of vascular NCD, NCD with Lewy bodies, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, which is a type of NCD due to prion disease.

1. **Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Alzheimer’s Disease:** This disorder accounts for about 60 to 80% of all cases of NCD (Jalbert, Daiello, & Lapane, 2008). It’s diagnosed when the person’s symptoms (a) meet the criteria for mild or major NCD, (b) have an insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment in one or more cognitive domains that does not interfere with daily activities for mild NCD and two or more cognitive domains that interfere with daily activities for major NCD, (c) meet the criteria for the probable or possible form of the disorder, and (d) are not better explained by another disorder. For *major NCD*, the diagnosis of probable Alzheimer’s disease requires evidence of a causative genetic mutation from genetic testing or family history and/or evidence of a decline in memory and learning and at least one other cognitive domain, a steadily progressive and gradual decline in cognition, and no evidence of a mixed etiology. When these criteria are not met, the diagnosis of possible Alzheimer’s disease is assigned.  For *mild NCD*, the diagnosis of probable Alzheimer’s disease requires evidence of a causative genetic mutation from genetic testing or family history, while the diagnosis of possible Alzheimer’s disease is assigned when there’s no evidence of a causative genetic mutation but there’s evidence of a decline in memory and learning, a steadily progressive and gradual decline in cognition, and no evidence of a mixed etiology. Prevalence rates for Alzheimer’s disease are affected by gender and race/ethnicity: Reported prevalence rates indicate that, overall, the rate for women is greater than the rate for men, although this difference may be due to the fact that women live longer than men do. Also, when considering gender and age, it is not clear that women have higher rates than men of the same age. With regard to race, among adults ages 65 and older, Black Americans have both the highest prevalence and incidence rates followed by, in order, Hispanic and White Americans. The DSM-5-TR notes that the onset of symptoms is most often from 70 to 89 years of age and that an early onset form of the disorder in individuals ages 49 through 59 is often related to known chromosomal mutations. It also states that “younger individuals are more likely to survive the full course of the disease, while older individuals are more likely to have medical comorbidities that affect the course and management of the illness” (p. 692).

The diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease can be definitively confirmed only with a brain biopsy or an autopsy of the brain after death (Khan, 2016). However, a brain biopsy is rarely done because of the discomfort and risks associated with this procedure. Therefore, an in vivo clinical diagnosis requires the presence of characteristic symptoms as well as elimination of other explanations for the symptoms. Eliminating alternative explanations involves obtaining information from a variety of sources including a family history, physical and neurological exams, laboratory tests, neuroimaging (e.g., CT scan, MRI, FDG-PET),, mental status evaluation, and neuropsychological testing. Note that several techniques are used to identify Alzheimer’s disease in research settings (e.g. molecular imaging, cerebrospinal fluid protein tests, and genetic risk profiling) but are not routinely used for clinical diagnosis.

The term “pseudodementia” is sometimes used to describe depression that has prominent cognitive symptoms. Unlike people with Alzheimer’s disease, people with pseudodementia usually respond well to treatment, and they have an abrupt onset of symptoms, exaggerate their cognitive problems, have moderate memory loss and symptoms of melancholia and anxiety, and often say “I don’t know" in response to assessment questions. In contrast, those with Alzheimer’s disease have an insidious onset of symptoms, minimize or deny their cognitive problems, have severe memory impairment, and symptoms of apathy and avolition, and often respond to assessment questions with wrong answers (Ahmed & Takeshita, 1997; Taylor, 1999).

a. **Etiology of Alzheimer’s Disease:** Alzheimer’s disease has been linked to chromosomal, neurotransmitter, and brain abnormalities (Turkington & Mitchell, 2010). Several genetic variants have been identified as risk factors, including the ApoE4 variant on chromosome 19.  Neurotransmitter abnormalities include reduced acetylcholine (ACh) and excessive glutamate, which are both known to be involved in learning and memory. The hallmark brain abnormalities of Alzheimer’s disease are amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, which disrupt cell-to-cell communication. Both are due to a build-up of proteins that occurs with normal aging but is more pervasive in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease. Extracellular amyloid plaques consist of clumps of beta-amyloid protein, which is formed from the breakdown of a larger protein known as amyloid precursor protein (APP). Intracellular neurofibrillary tangles are created by an abnormal accumulation of tau protein that results in the formation of threads that join to form tangles. Amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are first evident in medial temporal lobe structures (which include the entorhinal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus) and, as the disease progresses, they appear in the frontal and parietal lobes and eventually throughout the cortex. There’s also evidence that the locus coeruleus (an area in the brain stem) is the first area of the brain to be affected by Alzheimer’s disease and shows abnormalities before the appearance of symptoms (Mather & Harley, 2016). Note that neuronal loss in the locus coeruleus has also been linked to neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies and neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease (Brunnstrom, Friberg, Lindberg, & Englund, 2011). Finally, studies have found that a rapid deterioration in the sense of smell during a period of normal cognition predicts the subsequent development of mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer’s disease, with greater olfactory loss being associated with greater cognitive impairment. These studies have also shown that deterioration in the sense of smell is related to structural changes in areas of the brain that are involved in olfactory processing and are known to be affected by Alzheimer’s disease (e.g., entorhinal cortex, amydgala, hippocampus) (e.g., Murphy, 2019; Pacyna et al., 2023). 

**b. Factors Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease:** As noted in the DSM-5-TR, an increased risk for Alzheimer’s disease has been linked to several factors including low educational status, obesity, and hearing loss. Down Syndrome is also a risk factor: Standard trisomy 21 is the most common type of Down syndrome and is caused by an extra chromosome 21, which means that people with this disorder have an extra gene for the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene. Because of the extra APP gene, amyloid begins to accumulate in the brains of people with Down syndrome in their late teens to early 20s and increases their risk for early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Finally, Alzheimer’s disease has been linked to the Big Five personality traits: Terracciano et al. (2021) compared scores obtained by participants in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging on the Revised NEO Personality Inventory with the results of their positron emission tomography (PET) scans. They found that participants who obtained high scores on neuroticism and low scores on conscientiousness had more deposits of amyloid and tau (the hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease) than did participants who obtained low scores on neuroticism and high scores on conscientiousness.

c. **Stages of Alzheimer’s Disease:** The average duration of Alzheimer’s disease from symptom onset until death varies from person to person but is usually about 8 to 10 years. The progression of symptoms also varies somewhat but can be described as involving three stages (Cohan, 2012; Hammond, 2012; Turkington & Mitchell, 2010): The *early stage* lasts for about 2 to 4 years and involves short-term memory loss (which is usually the first symptom), anomia (difficulty recalling names of familiar people and objects), personality changes (often indifference and loss of spontaneity), anxiety or depression, impaired attention and concentration, poor judgment, and disorientation to time and space. The *middle stage* lasts for 2 to 10 years and is characterized by increasing short-term memory loss, long-term memory loss, labile mood, irritability, increasing disorientation, delusions and hallucinations, wandering and pacing, perseveration (repetitive speech and actions), loss of impulse control, impaired speech, disrupted sleep patterns, problems with normal daily activities (e.g., bathing, grooming, dressing), and sundowning (increased confusion, agitation, and restlessness in the late afternoon or evening). The *late stage* lasts for 1 to 3 years and involves severely deteriorated cognitive functioning, severe disorientation, apathy, severely impaired communication, agitation and aggression, decreased appetite, urinary and fecal incontinence, loss of basic motor skills and most or all self-care skills, abnormal reflexes, seizures, and frequent infections. 

d. **Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease:** There’s no cure for Alzheimer’s disease, but there are treatments that can temporarily reduce specific symptoms. Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine are used to reduce or stabilize memory loss, confusion, and other cognitive symptoms. Cholinesterase inhibitors include donepezil and rivastigmine and delay the breakdown of ACh, while memantine is an NMDA receptor antagonist and regulates glutamate activity. In addition, donanemab was recently approved by the FDA to slow the progression of early-stage Alzheimer’s disease. It is an intravenous infusion that is delivered every four weeks and exerts its effects by targeting and reducing amyloid plaques in the brain. Treatment often includes cognitive and behavioral interventions to improve cognitive functioning and reduce problematic behaviors and, as appropriate, antidepressants to alleviate depression and irritability, anxiolytics to reduce anxiety and restlessness, and antipsychotics to reduce behaviors that are related to mania or psychosis or pose a danger to self or others. Support, skills training, and other interventions for caregivers are also important. They not only benefit the caregivers but also reduce the likelihood that caregivers will place the family member with Alzheimer’s disease in a nursing home, which is desirable because remaining at home is associated with better patient outcomes (e.g., Mittelman, Haley, Clay, & Roth, 2006).  

2. **Neurocognitive Disorder with Lewy Bodies:** This disorder is due to the build-up in certain areas of the brain of Lewy bodies, which consist of an abnormal protein. It’s diagnosed when the individual meets the criteria for major or mild NCD and has the required number of core and suggestive features for the probable or possible forms of the disorder, and symptoms have an insidious onset and a gradual progression. The core features are fluctuating cognition with variations in attention and alertness, recurrent visual hallucinations, and symptoms of parkinsonism that develop after the cognitive symptoms. Suggestive features are symptoms of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder and severe neuroleptic sensitivity. For probable NCD, the person must have at least two core features or one core feature and one suggestive feature; for possible NCD, the person must have one core feature or one or both suggestive features.

Note that one difference between NCD with Lewy bodies and NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease is that, in the former, the prominent early cognitive symptoms are deficits in complex attention and visuospatial and executive functions while, in the latter, the prominent early cognitive symptoms are deficits in learning and memory. Also, the main difference between NCD with Lewy bodies and NCD due to Parkinson’s disease is the sequence of the onset of motor and cognitive symptoms: Motor symptoms precede cognitive symptoms in NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, while cognitive symptoms precede (or, in some cases, are concurrent with) motor symptoms in NCD with Lewy bodies.

3. **Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder:**  This disorder is diagnosed when the individual meets the criteria for major or mild NCD; symptoms are consistent with a vascular etiology as suggested by a temporal relationship between the onset of symptoms and a stroke or other cerebrovascular event or by a prominent decline in complex attention and executive functioning; and there’s evidence of cerebrovascular disease from the individual’s history, a physical exam, or neuroimaging. Its prognosis and course depend on the cause and may involve an acute onset with partial recovery, a stepwise decline, or a progressive course with fluctuations in symptom severity and plateaus that vary in duration.  Prevention and intervention efforts target risk and causative factors, which include hypertension, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, obesity, high cholesterol, and heavy cigarette smoking.

4. **Neurocognitive Disorder due to HIV Infection:** The diagnosis of this disorder requires the presence of symptoms that meet the criteria for major or mild NCD plus evidence of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus. Symptoms are characteristic of those associated with damage to subcortical areas of the brain and include forgetfulness, impaired attention and concentration, cognitive slowing, psychomotor retardation, clumsiness, tremors, apathy, and social withdrawal.

5. **Neurocognitive Disorder due to Prion Disease:** This disorder is diagnosed when the individual’s symptoms meet the criteria for major or mild NCD, symptoms have an insidious onset followed (in most cases) by a very rapid progression of impairment, and symptoms include motor features associated with prion disease or there’s biomarker evidence of the disease (e.g., characteristic lesions on an MRI). The most common type is Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). It’s characterized by a rapid progression of symptoms that often meet the criteria for major NCD in as few as six months. Symptoms include confusion and disorientation, impaired memory and judgment, and other neurocognitive deficits; ataxia, myoclonus, chorea, and other prominent motor symptoms; and psychiatric symptoms that may include apathy, anxiety, and/or mood swings. There are several types of CJD: Sporadic CJD is most common and has an unknown etiology, familial CJD is inherited, and acquired CJD can be due to consuming infected meat (variant CJD) or transmission during a blood transfusion or other medical procedure (iatrogenic CJD).

6. **Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder:** Frontotemporal NCD is the most common cause of early-onset NCD (i.e., of onset prior to 65 years of age). Its diagnosis requires the presence of symptoms that (a) meet the criteria for major or mild NCD; (b) have an insidious onset and gradual progression; (c) do not include a significant impact on learning and memory or perceptual-motor functioning, especially in the early stages; and (d) meet the criteria for the behavioral or language variant. The behavioral variant is most common and involves prominent declines in social cognition and/or executive abilities (e.g., socially inappropriate behaviors, deficits in organizing and planning) plus three or more of the following behavioral and personality symptoms: behavioral disinhibition; apathy and inertia; loss of sympathy or empathy; perseverative, stereotyped, or compulsive/ritualistic behaviors; hyperorality and dietary changes (e.g., overeating, preference for sweet foods). The language variant is characterized by a prominent decline in language that involves deficits in speech production, word finding, object naming, grammar, or word comprehension. [Note that the language variant is often referred to in the literature as primary progressive aphasia (PPA), which consists of three subtypes: semantic (impaired comprehension of written and spoken language), agrammatic/nonfluent (incorrect grammar and effortful, hesitant speech), and logopenic (impaired repetition of phrases and sentences and difficulty finding the right word).] Finally, although frontotemporal NCD and NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease have similar symptoms in their later stages, their prominent symptoms differ substantially in the early stages: Personality and behavioral changes (e.g., socially inappropriate behaviors, lack of concern for others) or aphasia and other language deficits are the prominent initial symptoms of frontotemporal NCD. In contrast, memory impairment is prominent in the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease and, initially, does not interfere with social behaviors.

**7. Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition:** This diagnosis is assigned when the individual’s symptoms meet the diagnostic criteria for major or mild NCD and there is evidence that the symptoms are a pathophysiological consequence of a medical condition. As noted in the DSM-5-TR, the course of this disorder “progresses in a manner that is commensurate with progression of the underlying medical condition” (p. 730). Some NCDs caused by a medical condition are irreversible but, when the medical condition is treatable, the NCD may improve or not progress. For example, NCDs due to hypoxia, infections, endocrine disorders, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, poisoning, or nutritional deficiencies are potentially reversible.

