# Schizophrenia Spectrum/Other Psychotic Disorders


The disorders in this category include brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and delusional disorder. Also, like other DSM-5-TR diagnostic categories, this one includes “other specified” and “unspecified” designations that are used when a patient’s symptoms do not fully meet the diagnostic criteria for any specific disorder.

**Brief Psychotic Disorder:** The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder requires the presence of one or more of four characteristic symptoms for at least one day but less than one month, with at least one symptom being delusions, hallucinations, or disorganized speech. The four characteristic symptoms are delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech (e.g., derailment, tangentiality), and grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior. [The DSM-5 defines a delusion as “a false belief based on incorrect inference about external reality that is firmly held despite what almost everyone else believes and despite what constitutes incontrovertible and obvious proof of evidence to the contrary” (p. 819). It defines an hallucination as “a perception-like experience with the clarity and impact of a true perception but without the external stimulation of the relevant sensory organ” (p. 822) and notes that hallucinations must be distinguished from illusions, which occur when “an actual external stimulus is misperceived or misinterpreted” (p. 822).]

**Schizophreniform Disorder:** This diagnosis requires the presence of at least two of five characteristic symptoms for at least one month but less than six months, with at least one symptom being delusions, hallucinations, or disorganized speech. The five characteristic symptoms are delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, and negative symptoms (e.g., avolition, alogia, anhedonia).  
**Schizophrenia:** The diagnosis of schizophrenia requires the presence of an active phase that lasts for at least one month and includes at least two of five characteristic symptoms, with at least one symptom being delusions, hallucinations, or disorganized speech. (The other two characteristic symptoms are grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior and negative symptoms). There must also be continuous signs of the disorder for at least six months that may include prodromal and/or residual phases in addition to the required active phase. Prodromal and residual phases consist of two or more characteristic symptoms in an attenuated form or negative symptoms only.

1. **Etiology:** Schizophrenia has been linked to genetic factors and neurotransmitter and brain abnormalities. With regard to genetic factors, research has confirmed that schizophrenia is not due to a single gene but is polygenic (like several other psychiatric disorders), which means it is the result of the effects of multiple genes. The studies have also confirmed that schizophrenia is highly heritable with twin, family, and adoption studies reporting heritability estimates ranging from 70% to 80% (St. Clair & Lang, 2021). Much of the evidence for a genetic contribution is provided by family studies which have found that, the greater the degree of genetic similarity, the greater the concordance rate (the likelihood that two people with shared genes will develop the same disorder). The concordance rates for first-degree relatives reported by Gottesman (1991) are frequently cited and are listed below. More recently, a review of the research found concordance rates of 42% to 48% for monozygotic twins and 4% to 11% for dizygotic twins (Zandi et al., 2019).
| Relationship to Person with Schizophrenia | Concordance Rate                          |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Parent                                    | 6%                                        |
| Biological sibling                        | 9%                                        |
| Child of one parent with schizophrenia    | 13%                                       |
| Dizygotic (fraternal) twin                | 17%                                       |
| Child of two parents with schizophrenia   | 46%                                       |
| Monozygotic (identical) twin              | 48%                                       |

 
The contribution of genetics to schizophrenia has also been confirmed by studies investigating psychiatric outcomes for the adult offspring of discordant monozygotic and dizygotic twins (i.e., twin pairs in which only one twin has schizophrenia). These studies found that the offspring of discordant monozygotic twins had an increased risk for schizophrenia and schizophrenia-related disorders, with the risk being similar for the offspring of affected and non-affected twins. In contrast, for discordant dizygotic twins, the risk for offspring of affected twins was similar to the risk for offspring of monozygotic twins and was greater than the risk for offspring of non-affected twins (Fischer, 1971; Gottesman & Bertelsen, 1989). As noted by Pogue-Geile and Gottesman (2007), these results suggest that “discordant MZ twins have significant genetic liability that can be transmitted to their offspring even though they do not manifest it themselves” (p. 214).

Neurotransmitters that have been linked to schizophrenia include dopamine, glutamate, and serotonin. According to the original *dopamine hypothesis*, schizophrenia is due to high levels of dopamine or hyperactivity of dopamine receptors. Evidence for this hypothesis is provided by research showing that amphetamines increase dopamine activity and produce schizophrenia-like symptoms, while drugs that decrease dopamine activity reduce or eliminate these symptoms. A revised version of the dopamine hypothesis (Kuepper, Skinbjerg, & Abi-Dargham, 2012) predicts that the positive symptoms of schizophrenia are due to dopamine hyperactivity in subcortical regions of the brain (especially in striatal areas), while the negative symptoms are due to dopamine hypoactivity in cortical regions (especially in the prefrontal cortex).

Brain abnormalities associated with schizophrenia include enlarged ventricles and *hypofrontality*, which refers to lower-than-normal activity in the prefrontal cortex and is believed to contribute to the disorder’s negative and cognitive symptoms. One model of schizophrenia that’s consistent with the revised dopamine hypothesis described above implicates cortical and subcortical regions. It predicts that dysfunction in the temporal-limbic-frontal network causes the negative symptoms of schizophrenia as well as disinhibition in subcortical areas of the brain that, in turn, increases the release of dopamine in the striatum (caudate nucleus, putamen, and nucleus accumbens) and causes the positive symptoms (Hein, et al., 2003).

2. **Comorbidity:** Common comorbid conditions include anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and tobacco use disorder. With regard to the latter, the studies have found that about 70 to 85% of individuals with schizophrenia are tobacco users and, according to the DSM-5-TR, over half of individuals with this diagnosis meet the diagnostic criteria for tobacco use disorder.

3. **Onset, Course and Prognosis:** The psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia usually first appear between the late teens and early 30s, with the peak age of onset being in the early- to mid-20s for males and the late-20s for females. Psychotic symptoms often decrease with increasing age, while negative symptoms and cognitive symptoms persist. A better prognosis for schizophrenia is associated with female gender, an acute and late onset of symptoms, comorbid mood symptoms (especially depressive symptoms), predominantly positive symptoms, precipitating factors, a family history of a mood disorder, and good premorbid adjustment. In contrast*, anosognosia* (a lack of insight into or awareness of one’s disorder) is associated with non-adherence to treatment and an elevated risk for relapse. Patients whose family members are high in *expressed emotion* are also at increased risk for relapse. Expressed emotion refers to the emotional response of family members to a patient with schizophrenia or other mental disorder, and families high in expressed emotion are characterized by high levels of criticism and hostility toward and emotional overinvolvement with the patient (Butzlaff & Hooley, 1998).

The research has identified variations in the onset, course, and prognosis of schizophrenia across countries. For example, there’s evidence that patients living in non-Western developing countries are more likely than those living in Western industrialized countries to experience an acute onset of symptoms, a shorter course, and a higher rate of remission (e.g., Hopper & Wanderling, 2000). The studies have also found that an “immigrant paradox” applies to schizophrenia, alcohol use disorder, and a number of other psychiatric disorders. It occurs when “newly arrived immigrants have better health outcomes than much more acculturated immigrants (with longer US residence) or even US born natives of the same ethnicity” (Ajayi & Ajayi,  2008, p. 81).

4. **Treatment:** The treatment of schizophrenia is multimodal and includes psychosocial interventions, an antipsychotic drug, and adjunctive medications to treat comorbid disorders. Evidence-based psychosocial interventions include cognitive-behavior therapy for psychosis (CBTp), cognitive remediation for schizophrenia, acceptance and commitment therapy, assertive community treatment, family psychoeducation, illness self-management training, social skills training, and supported employment services. Antipsychotic drugs are divided into first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs), second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs), and third-generation antipsychotics (TGAs). The choice of a drug involves considering several factors including the drug’s likely benefits and side effects; its potential interactions with other drugs the patient is currently taking; and the patient’s preferences, past response to antipsychotic drugs, and health conditions that might be affected by the drug’s side effects. The SGA clozapine has been found to be the most effective antipsychotic for treatment-resistant schizophrenia which, as defined in the American Psychiatric Association’s *Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of Patients with Schizophrenia* (2021), occurs when “a patient’s symptoms have shown no response or partial or suboptimal response to two antipsychotic medication trials of at least 6 weeks each at an adequate dosage of medication” (p. 88). Medication non-adherence is often a problem for patients with schizophrenia during all phases of the illness. There is evidence, however, that involvement of the patient’s family or other support system in the patient’s care increases medication adherence and decreases the risk for relapse (Miller & Buckley, 2018). (Additional information about antipsychotic drugs is provided in the physiological psychology and psychopharmacology content summary.)

Finally, several multicomponent early interventions have been developed for individuals at high risk for schizophrenia or in the early stages of schizophrenia. An example is NAVIGATE, which is a team-based program that targets individuals experiencing their first episode of psychosis and includes family education, individual resiliency training, supported employment and education, and individualized medication treatment. Individualized resiliency training is based on CBTp and teaches patients the skills they need to manage their illness. For example, it helps patients process the precursors, triggers, and effects of their psychotic episodes; uses cognitive restructuring to help patients challenge self-stigmatizing beliefs; and teaches patients strategies that help them improve their psychological well-being by strengthening their positive feelings, thoughts, and behaviors (Mueser et al., 2015).

**Schizoaffective Disorder:** The diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires concurrent symptoms of schizophrenia and a major depressive or manic episode for most of the duration of the illness, but with the presence of delusions or hallucinations for two or more weeks without mood symptoms.

**Delusional Disorder:** This diagnosis requires that (a) the person have one or more delusions for a duration of at least one month and (b) the person’s overall functioning has not been markedly impaired except for any direct effects of the delusion. The DSM-5-TR distinguishes between the following subtypes: (a) erotomanic (the person believes that another person is in love with him/her); (b) grandiose (the person believes he/she has great but unrecognized talent or insight); (c) jealous (the person believes his/her spouse or partner is unfaithful); (d) persecutory (the person believes he/she is being conspired against, spied on, poisoned, or maliciously maligned); and (e) somatic (the person’s delusion involves bodily functions or sensations).

**Other Specified/Unspecified Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders:** The DSM-5-TR provides two diagnoses that can be used when a patient’s symptoms are similar to symptoms of diagnoses in this category but do not fully meet the criteria for a specific diagnosis: *Other specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder* is used when a clinician wants to indicate the reason why a patient’s symptoms do not meet the criteria for a more specific diagnosis. The DSM-5-TR lists several situations when this may occur – e.g., when the patient is experiencing persistent auditory hallucinations without any other symptoms or is experiencing attenuated psychosis syndrome which involves psychotic-like symptoms that are less severe or more transient than those associated with full psychosis. *Unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder* is used when a clinician chooses not to specify a reason why a patient’s symptoms do not meet the criteria for a specific diagnosis in this category (e.g., because currently available information is insufficient to assign a specific diagnosis).
