# Brain Regions/Functions – Hindbrain, Midbrain, and Subcortical Forebrain…

**Brain Regions/Functions – Hindbrain, Midbrain, and Subcortical Forebrain Structures**

The brain is divided into three regions – hindbrain, midbrain, and forebrain. The *hindbrain* and *midbrain* constitute the brainstem which, in terms of evolution, is the oldest part of the brain.  The consequences of brainstem damage depend on its location and extent, but symptoms may include respiratory problems, difficulty swallowing, slurred speech, problems with balance and coordination, nausea, sleep disturbances, confusion, or loss of consciousness. The *forebrain* includes subcortical structures (hypothalamus, thalamus, basal ganglia, amygdala, cingulate cortex, and hippocampus) and the cerebral cortex.

**Hindbrain Structures:** The hindbrain is located just above the spinal cord and includes the medulla, pons, and cerebellum.
1. **Medulla:** The medulla is also known as the medulla oblongata. It’s responsible for the involuntary mouth and throat movements involved in swallowing, coughing, and sneezing, and it regulates a number of functions that are essential for survival including respiration, heart rate, and blood pressure. Brain injury and certain diseases and drugs (especially opioids) can disrupt the functioning of the medulla and result in death.   

2. **Pons:** The pons connects the two halves of the cerebellum and helps coordinate movements on the two sides of the body, and it relays messages between the cerebellum and cerebral cortex. It also plays a role in respiration and the regulation of deep sleep and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.

3. **Cerebellum:** The cerebellum coordinates voluntary movements and is responsible for maintaining posture and balance. Damage can cause *ataxia* which is characterized by symptoms associated with alcohol intoxication and include a lack of muscle control, impaired balance and coordination, slurred speech, nystagmus (jerky eye movements), and blurred or double vision. The cerebellum is important for processing and storing procedural memories (e.g., running, playing a musical instrument, driving a car) and other implicit memories (memories that operate on an unconscious, automatic level). It’s also involved in some non-motor cognitive functions including attention, linguistic processing, and visuospatial abilities.  

**Midbrain Structures:** The midbrain connects the hindbrain to the forebrain and includes the reticular formation and substantia nigra.
1. **Reticular Formation:** The reticular formation consists of a network of neurons that extend from the medulla into the midbrain. It’s involved in a variety of functions including regulation of muscle tone, coordination of eye movements, and control of pain. It contains the reticular activating system (RAS) which is also known as the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS). The RAS mediates consciousness and arousal, controls the sleep/wake cycle, and alerts the cerebral cortex to incoming sensory signals. Lesions in the RAS can cause a comatose state, while direct electrical stimulation or stimulation by sensory input can awaken a sleeping person and cause an awake person to become more alert.

2. **Substantia Nigra:** The substantia nigra plays a role in reward-seeking, drug addiction, and, through its connection to the basal ganglia, motor control. Degeneration of dopamine-producing cells in the substantia nigra is a cause of the slowed movement, tremors, rigidity, and other motor symptoms associated with Parkinson’s disease. (Note that some authors include the substantia nigra as part of the basal ganglia.)

**Subcortical Forebrain Structures:** These structures include the hypothalamus, thalamus, basal ganglia, amygdala, and hippocampus.

1. **Hypothalamus:** Despite its small size, the hypothalamus plays a key role in many essential functions. It maintains the body’s homeostasis and regulates functions critical to survival through its influence on the autonomic nervous system and pituitary gland. These functions include regulating body temperature, blood pressure, heart and respiration rates, thirst and hunger, growth, sexual activity, reproduction, and the body’s response to stress. It also contributes to emotions, memory, and circadian rhythms: Its contribution to emotions has been confirmed by studies showing that electrical stimulation of or damage to different areas of the hypothalamus can elicit aggressive behavior and rage or produce crying or laughter. In addition, the hypothalamus contains the mammillary bodies, which play a role in memory, and the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which serves as the body’s biological clock and regulates the sleep-wake cycle and other circadian rhythms.  

The hypothalamus influences the pituitary gland in two ways: First, it produces hormones that stimulate or inhibit the release of hormones produced by the *anterior pituitary*. As an example, the hypothalamus initiates the development of secondary sex characteristics and regulates the maturation and maintenance of the reproductive system by secreting gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) which, in turn, stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete gonadotropins that regulate the functions of the testes and ovaries. Second, the hypothalamus sends oxytocin and vasopressin (also known as antidiuretic hormone) to the *posterior pituitary*, which stores these hormones and then secretes them into the bloodstream at appropriate times. For instance, oxytocin released from the posterior pituitary stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth and lactation after childbirth, while vasopressin regulates water balance in the body by controlling the amount of water reabsorption in the kidneys. Studies have found that oxytocin and/or vasopressin play a role in social bonding and affiliation, trust and cooperation, emotion recognition, social memory, sexual behaviors, aggression, fear, anxiety, and stress (e.g., Heinrichs & Domes, 2008; Litvin & Pfaff, 2013; Mitra, 2021). For example, with regard to stress, elevated levels of oxytocin inhibit hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and sympathetic nervous system responses to stress, which reduces blood pressure, heart rate, and cortisol levels (Grahn et al., 2021).

Finally, oxytocin has been found to have beneficial effects for people who have autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and other disorders that involve deficits in recognizing emotions in the facial expressions of other people and other aspects of social-emotional cognition. For instance, there is evidence that, for youth and adults with autism spectrum disorder, intranasal administration of oxytocin improves emotion recognition (e.g., Domes et al., 2006; Guastella et al., 2010). However, research with healthy adults has produced inconsistent results: Most studies have found beneficial effects of oxytocin on emotion recognition, but these effects are often not statistically significant or are present for only certain emotions. There is also some evidence that high oxytocin levels in healthy adults can have adverse effects. For example, Cardoso et al. (2014) found that increasing oxytocin levels in healthy adult subjects impaired their ability to accurately identify the intensity of facial expressions of emotion in other people because it caused the subjects to be overly sensitive to facial expressions (especially expressions of disgust and surprise). (Note that, in the literature, oxytocin and vasopressin are both referred to by different authors as hormones, peptide hormones, or neuropeptides.)

2. **Thalamus:** The thalamus is described as a “relay station” because it receives and then transmits sensory information to the cortex for all of the senses except smell. It also plays an important role in the coordination of sensory and motor functioning, language and speech, and declarative memory. With regard to memory, *Korsakoff syndrome* is caused by a thiamine deficiency that’s often the result of chronic alcoholism and that damages neurons in the thalamus and mammillary bodies. Its primary symptoms are anterograde amnesia, retrograde amnesia, and confabulation, which involves filling memory gaps (especially gaps in episodic memory) with false information that the person seems to believe is true.

3. **Basal Ganglia:** The basal ganglia consist of the caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens, and globus pallidus. The caudate nucleus, putamen, and nucleus accumbens are collectively referred to as the striatum and receive input from the cerebral cortex, while the globus pallidus transmits information to the thalamus. These structures are involved in the initiation and control of voluntary movements, procedural and habit learning, cognitive functioning (e.g., attention and decision-making), and emotions. Basal ganglia damage has been linked to a number of conditions including mood disorders, schizophrenia, ADHD, OCD, Tourette’s disorder, Huntington’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease. (Note that some authors include the nucleus accumbens as part of the basal ganglia, while others include it as part of the limbic system. A reason for this inconsistency is because the nucleus accumbens connects these two systems and coordinates their activities, and some investigators are most interested in its role in the basal ganglia while others are more interested in its role in the limbic system.)

4. **Limbic System:** The limbic system is responsible for emotion, motivation, and memory. The amygdala, cingulate cortex, and hippocampus have traditionally been identified as its primary structures. However, brain imaging techniques have found reciprocal connections between these three structures and several other structures of the brain. Consequently, there is currently no consensus about which structures should be considered core components of the limbic system, with some current descriptions including, for example, the hypothalamus and/or the thalamus.

(a) **Amygdala:** The amygdala participates in several essential functions. It is responsible for processing and regulating fear, anger, anxiety, joy, and other emotions; recognizing fear and other emotions in facial expressions; and attaching emotions to memories. With regard to memory, the amygdala is important for the formation of flashbulb memories, which are vivid and enduring memories for surprising and shocking events. The amygdala is also part of the pain matrix (areas of the brain responsive to noxious stimuli), and it is known to play a key role in pain modulation (amplification and reduction of the sensation of pain) and emotional responses to pain, especially anxiety and fear (e.g., Neugebauer et al., 2020). In addition, the amygdala is one of the areas of the brain that has been linked to risk taking. For example, Weller et al. (2009) note that results of their study confirm previous research showing “that risky decision-making is dependent on the integrity of a neural circuitry that includes several brain regions known to be critical for the experience and expression of emotions, namely the insula, amygdala, and ventromedial prefrontal cortex” (p. 347). Finally, Kluver and Bucy (1939) found that bilateral lesioning of the amygdala, hippocampus, and temporal lobes in rhesus monkeys produced a set of symptoms that is known as Kluver-Bucy syndrome. These symptoms include hyperphagia, hyperorality, reduced fear, hypersexuality, and visual agnosia (which is also known as psychic blindness). Kluver-Bucy syndrome has also been observed in humans who have bilateral temporal lobe lesions that include amygdala lesions, and amygdala abnormalities have been linked to several psychiatric disorders including social anxiety disorder and other anxiety disorders, major depressive disorder, PTSD, autism spectrum disorder, and substance use disorders.

(b) **Cingulate Cortex:** The cingulate cortex plays a role in motivation, memory, and emotions, including emotional reactions to pain. People with damage to the cingulate cortex experience pain but are not emotionally distressed by it. Abnormalities in the cingulate cortex (and several other areas of the brain including the prefrontal cortex, insula, hippocampus, amygdala, and thalamus) have been linked to major depressive disorder (Pandya et al., 2012). For example, there is evidence that reduced volume of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is associated with depression and that improvements in depressive symptoms following participation in cognitive behavior therapy are associated with increases in ACC volume (Fujino et al., 2015; Ibrahim et al., 2022).
(c) **Hippocampus:** The hippocampus is involved more in memory and less in emotions than the other limbic system structures are. It’s responsible for transferring declarative memories from short-term to long-term memory and plays an important role in spatial memory (memory for the spatial characteristics of the environment). The impact of damage to the hippocampus on memory is demonstrated by research linking the degeneration of cells in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex (an area adjacent to the hippocampus) to the impairments in episodic memory and spatial navigation associated with Alzheimer’s disease. In addition, research has found that acute or chronic increases in cortisol levels in the hippocampus as the result of stress or other condition (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome, administration of cortisone) impairs the retrieval of declarative memories (Wolf, 2010). There’s also evidence that hippocampal abnormalities contribute to major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and PTSD (Zorumski & Rubin, 2011). For example, for people with PTSD, the studies have found that the more extreme the traumatic stress and the more severe the person’s symptoms, the more likely the person would have a smaller-than-normal hippocampus. However, some studies suggest that exposure to traumatic stress causes a reduction in hippocampal volume, while others suggest that reduced hippocampal volume is a risk factor for developing PTSD after exposure to traumatic stress (e.g., Lindgren, Bergdahl, & Nyberg, 2016). 