# Memory and Sleep


**Memory:** The research has identified several brain areas and neural mechanisms that are responsible for various aspects of memory.

1. **Brain Areas:** Brain areas that are known to be essential for memory include the following:

(a) **Hippocampus:** The importance of the hippocampus for memory was demonstrated by the consequences of surgery performed on a patient known as H.M. as treatment for his severe seizures. The surgery involved bilateral removal of his hippocampus, amygdala, and medial temporal lobe. Following surgery, H.M.’s short-term memory and procedural memory were intact; however, he exhibited some deficits in remote long-term episodic memory and was unable to transfer any new declarative information from short-term to long-term memory. Subsequent studies using brain imaging techniques have confirmed that the hippocampus plays an important role in the consolidation of long-term declarative memories (transfer of declarative memories from short- to long-term memory) and has also found that it is involved in spatial memory, which is memory for the location of objects and places.

(b) **Basal Ganglia and Cerebellum:** These areas are essential for procedural memories and other implicit memories (memories that operate on an unconscious, automatic level). Patients with damage to these areas have trouble learning new skills and performing previously learned skills.

(c) **Amygdala:** The amygdala’s responsibility for attaching emotions to memories has been demonstrated by several studies. For example, research has found that people with intact amygdalas tend to remember emotional experiences better than nonemotional ones, but people with amygdala damage have the same level of recall for emotional and nonemotional experiences because emotions have not been attached to their memories.

(d) **Prefrontal Cortex:**  The prefrontal cortex is essential for several aspects of memory including working memory, prospective memory, item memory, and source memory. Item memory and source memory are aspects of episodic memory: Item memory refers to memory for *what happened* in the past, while source memory refers to memory for *when and where it happened* (Dennis et al., 2008).

(e) **Thalamus**: The thalamus is involved in memory processing, and damage can cause anterograde and retrograde amnesia.

2. **Neural Mechanisms:** Initial information on the neural mechanisms responsible for learning and memory was provided by research conducted by Kandel and his colleagues (e.g., Kandel, 1976). Their subjects were sea slugs (Aplysia), which were ideal subjects because of the small number and large size of their neurons. The results of their studies indicated that classical conditioning of reflexes had two effects: The short-term storage of information involved an increase in the release of the neurotransmitter serotonin, while long-term storage involved the development of new synapses and changes in the structure of existing neurons.

Researchers subsequently identified a similar phenomenon in other animals and humans and referred to it as *long-term potentiation* (LTP). LTP was first observed in glutamate receptors in the hippocampus but was subsequently observed in other areas of the brain including the amygdala and entorhinal cortex. It occurs in a neuron as the result of rapid and/or high-frequency stimulation and is believed to play an essential role in learning and memory formation. Researchers also found that changes in synapses associated with the formation of long-term memories depends on the synthesis of RNA, which is necessary for protein synthesis. For example, studies have found that administering a drug that inhibits RNA synthesis around the time of training prevents the formation of long-term (but not short-term) memories.

**Sleep:** Most theories about the function of sleep fall into one of two categories (Eysenck, 2004): Recovery/restoration theories view the purpose of sleep to be repairing damage that occurs during wakefulness, while adaptive/evolutionary theories propose that sleep is related to the need to adapt to environmental threats by, for example, conserving energy. 

**1. Stages of Sleep:** Electroencephalography (EEG) provides information on the frequency and amplitude of brain waves by using electrodes placed on the scalp that each measure the electrical impulses generated by large groups of cortical neurons. EEG recordings obtained during sleep indicate that it can be divided on the basis of brain waves into two distinct states (Espana, 2013): non-rapid eye movement (NREM) and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. NREM sleep consists of three stages that are characterized by high-amplitude, low-frequency synchronized activity and are not accompanied by rapid eye movements. These three stages are designated as stages N1, N2, and N3. In contrast, REM sleep is characterized by low-amplitude, high-frequency desynchronized EEG activity and is accompanied by quick movements of the eyes in various directions. It is often designated as Stage R. 
(a) *Stage N1* is a transitional stage between wakefulness and sleep. During this stage, alpha waves (which are characteristic of an awake and relaxed or drowsy state) are replaced by theta waves. A person is falling asleep during this stage but, if awakened, is likely to deny having been asleep. 
(b) Theta waves continue during *stage N2* but are interrupted by sleep spindles (sudden bursts of moderately fast waves) and K-complexes (large slow waves). This stage is accompanied by muscle relaxation, drop in body temperature, slowed breathing, and reduced heart rate.
(c) During *stage N3*, theta waves are replaced by delta waves, which have a higher amplitude and lower frequency than theta waves. This stage is also referred to as slow-wave sleep (SWS) and is the deepest level of sleep. A person in this stage is difficult to awaken.
(d) *Stage R* sleep is associated with beta waves (which are characteristic of an awake and alert state) and theta waves. This stage is referred to as paradoxical sleep because it is characterized by an active brain and physiological arousal while the body’s major muscle groups are nearly paralyzed and the person is very difficult to arouse. Most dreams occur during REM sleep and are more vivid, bizarre, and detailed than those that occur during NREM sleep. 

Following the first episodes of NREM and REM sleep, a person cycles through the sleep stages again, and this continues throughout the night. However, as the night progresses, the duration of REM sleep increases and the duration of stage N3 sleep decreases.

2. **Lifespan Changes in Sleep:** Sleep patterns change in a predictable way with increasing age. Newborn infants sleep longer than older children and adults do, spend more time in active (REM) sleep, and begin the sleep period with active sleep that is followed by quiet (non-REM) sleep. This sequence reverses at about 3 months of age, and the three stages of non-REM sleep are evident by about 6 months. In addition, total sleep time decreases from 14 to 16 hours a day in infancy to about 8 hours in adulthood. Although older adults do not require less sleep than younger adults, they have more trouble falling asleep, spend less time in deep (stage N3) sleep, experience more evenly distributed REM sleep throughout the night, wake up more often during the night, and experience an advanced sleep phase, which is also known as circadian phase advance and involves going to sleep earlier in the evening and waking up earlier.