# Neurological and Endocrine Disorders

**Neurological and Endocrine Disorders

Cerebrovascular Accident:** A cerebrovascular accident (CVA) is also known as a stroke and is caused by a sudden interruption of blood flow to the brain that causes a loss in neurological functioning. The leading risk factor for a stroke is hypertension. Other risk factors include atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries), heart disease, diabetes, cigarette smoking, heavy alcohol consumption, obesity, older age, male gender, African American race, and a family history of stroke. 

There are two main types of stroke: An *ischemic stroke* is most common and occurs when there is blockage in a cerebral artery that is due to a blood clot that developed in an artery in the brain (thrombotic stroke) or that developed in the heart or elsewhere in the body and traveled through the bloodstream to the brain (embolic stroke). Note that a blockage of an artery for less than five minutes that causes temporary symptoms is referred to as a transient ischemic stroke (TIA). TIAs are medical emergencies and are a warning sign that a more severe stroke may occur in the future. A *hemorrhagic stroke* is due to bleeding that occurs when there is a rupture in a cerebral artery within the brain (intracerebral hemorrhage) or in the space between the brain and the membrane that covers the brain (subarachnoid hemorrhage). 

The symptoms of a stroke depend on which artery is involved: (a) The *middle cerebral artery* is most often involved in a stroke. Symptoms include contralateral sensory loss, contralateral hemiparesis (weakness) or hemiplegia (paralysis), contralateral homonymous hemianopsia (visual field loss), dysarthria (slurred speech), and aphasia when the dominant hemisphere is affected or apraxia and contralateral neglect when the nondominant hemisphere is affected. (b) Symptoms of a stroke involving the *posterior cerebral artery* include contralateral sensory loss and hemiparesis, contralateral homonymous hemianopsia or other visual impairment, dysarthria, nausea and vomiting, and memory loss. (c) Symptoms of a stroke involving the *anterior cerebral artery* include contralateral sensory loss and hemiparesis (especially in the leg), impaired insight and judgment, mutism, apathy, confusion, and urinary incontinence.

**Traumatic Brain Injury:** A traumatic brain injury (TBI) can be open or closed: The consequences of *open (penetrating) head injuries* depend on the injury’s location and severity, but *closed head injuries* usually cause more widespread damage than open head injuries do. TBI may produce a loss of consciousness; and, when individuals regain consciousness, they usually experience a combination of emotional, cognitive, behavioral, and physical symptoms. Cognitive symptoms of TBI may include some degree of anterograde and retrograde amnesia. Anterograde amnesia is also known as post-traumatic amnesia when it’s due to TBI, and its duration is a good predictor of recovery from other symptoms. When retrograde amnesia occurs, recent long-term memories are affected more than remote memories; and, when lost memories begin to return, those from the most distant past are recovered first. Other symptoms include nausea and vomiting, headaches, sleep disturbances (e.g., hypersomnia or insomnia), depression, irritability, aprosodia, and seizures. Aprosodia can occur as the result of a TBI, stroke, or progressive neurologic disease, and is the inability to express or understand prosody, which refers to variations in the rhythm, pitch, timing, and loudness of speech that are used to convey emotional information. Post-traumatic seizures (PTS) occur within one week after TBI and can often be successfully treated with anti-seizure medication. When seizures occur more than one week after TBI, they are classified as post-traumatic epilepsy (PTE). PTE is harder to treat than PTS, with vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), responsive neurostimulation (RNS), or surgery being considered when medication is ineffective (Rao & Parko, 2015). There is some evidence that seizures following TBI are linked to temporal lobe and hippocampal atrophy (e.g., Tubi et al., 2018). With regard to prognosis, most people experience the most recovery from TBI during the first three months with substantial additional improvement during the first year (e.g., Carroll et al., 2004; Lawhorne & Philpott, 2010). However, many people continue to have some symptoms indefinitely, especially those with a moderate to severe injury.

**Motor Disorders:** Huntington’s and Parkinson’s disease are caused by degeneration of cells in the motor areas of the brain.
1. **Huntington’s Disease:**  Huntington's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that involves affective, cognitive, and motor symptoms. The gene responsible for the disease is a mutated version of the huntingtin (HTT) gene on chromosome 4. Because this is an autosomal dominant gene, this means that the offspring of a person with this gene have a 50% chance of inheriting the disease. Huntington’s disease is caused by neurodegeneration in the caudate nucleus and putamen in the basal ganglia and several other areas of the brain including the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and thalamus, with neuroimaging studies finding that glucose hypometabolism and atrophy in the caudate nucleus and putamen are apparent years before the onset of symptoms (Esmaeilzadeh et al., 2011). Huntington’s disease is also associated with abnormal levels of several neurotransmitters including GABA, dopamine, and glutamate (Frank, 2010). 

Symptoms most often appear when people are between 30 and 50 years of age, and life expectancy following the onset of symptoms is usually 10 to 30 years. The progression of the disorder varies, but affective symptoms (e.g., depression and mood swings) often precede cognitive and motor symptoms, which suggests these symptoms are not just a reaction to the disease but, instead, a manifestation of underlying pathological changes. Cognitive symptoms include short-term memory loss and impaired concentration and judgment, and the primary motor symptom is chorea, which involves irregular, uncontrollable jerky or writhing movements in the hands, face, limbs, and torso. As the disease progresses, affective, cognitive, and motor symptoms worsen. In the later stages, motor symptoms become severe and include rigidity and bradykinesia, and the person has trouble walking, speaking, and swallowing and may meet the criteria for mild or major neurocognitive disorder. There is no cure for Huntington’s disease, and the goals of treatment are to relieve symptoms and improve quality of life.

2. **Parkinson’s Disease:**  Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that produces prominent motor symptoms and is the result of a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Its motor symptoms are due primarily to a degeneration of dopamine-producing cells in the substantia nigra, which reduces dopamine levels in areas of the basal ganglia. In addition, there is evidence that excessive glutamate activity is implicated in the progression of the disease (Gasparini, Di Paolo, & Gomez-Mancilla, 2013); low levels of acetylcholine (ACh) play a role in impairments in gait and balance and cognitive decline (Bohnen et al., 2022); and low levels of norepinephrine contribute to depression, cognitive deficits, sleep disturbances, and other non-motor symptoms (Paredes-Rodriguez et al., 2020). Finally, research has linked variants of the ApoE gene to an increased risk for neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease as well as other neurocognitive disorders including neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, and vascular neurocognitive disorder (Verghese, Castellano, & Holtzman, 2011).

The primary motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease include the following: (a) resting tremor that occurs when muscles are at rest and that begins in the hands and includes “pill rolling”; (b) postural instability (impaired balance and coordination); (c) rigidity in the limbs and trunk; (d) bradykinesia (slowed voluntary movement) that causes a slow shuffling gait, decreased eye blinking, and, in combination with rigidity, a mask-like facial expression; and (e) akinesia, which is an inability to move one's muscles voluntarily or in response to a command and involves sudden, temporary episodes of immobility that are sometimes referred to as "freezing." Non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease include gastrointestinal problems, sleep disturbances, pain, loss of smell, anxiety, and depression. With regard to depression, up to 50% of people experience depression at some time during the disorder, with depressive symptoms preceding motor symptoms in about 20% of cases (Capp-Ahlgren & Dehlin, 2001; Lieberman, 2003). In addition, some people eventually develop mild or major neurocognitive disorder. 

There is no cure for Parkinson’s disease, but some symptoms can be temporarily alleviated with medications that increase dopamine levels. *Levodopa* is generally considered the first-line medication. It exerts its beneficial effects by being converted to dopamine in the brain and is most effective for treating bradykinesia and may also reduce muscle rigidity and tremor. *Dopamine agonists* are alternatives to levodopa and exert their effects by mimicking dopamine at receptor sites. Advantages of dopamine agonists are that they may delay the progression of Parkinson’s disease and they have fewer long-term side effects than levodopa does, especially dystonia, myoclonus, and other dyskinesias. *Deep brain stimulation* (DBS) is a surgical treatment that is also used to reduce motor symptoms. It involves implanting electrodes that deliver electrical impulses in areas of the brain that are known to be responsible for the patient’s motor symptoms and implanting a programmable pulse generator under the skin in the patient’s chest. When turned on by the patient, the pulse generator sends electrical impulses to target areas in the brain, which alters brain activity in those areas. DBS is considered when motor symptoms are not adequately controlled by medication and are significantly impairing the patient’s quality of life. (Note that dopamine agonists are used to treat several other conditions including restless leg syndrome and neuroleptic malignant syndrome and that DBS is also used to treat essential tremor, dystonia, refractory epilepsy, refractory OCD, and several other conditions.)

**Seizures:**  “A seizure is a transient physical or behavioral alteration that results from abnormal electrical activity in the brain” (Story, 2022, p. 472). Seizures can be provoked or unprovoked: Provoked seizures have a known cause (e.g., traumatic brain injury, central nervous system infection, stroke, fever, alcohol withdrawal), while unprovoked seizures occur without a known cause. When seizures are recurrent and unprovoked, epilepsy may be diagnosed (*Epilepsy and Seizures*, n.d.).

**1. Types of Seizures:** Focal onset seizures and generalized onset seizures are the two main types of seizures.
(a) **Focal Onset Seizures:** Focal onset seizures begin in a localized area in one cerebral hemisphere and affect one side of the body, although they may spread to other parts of the brain. *Focal onset aware seizures* (also known as simple partial seizures) do not affect consciousness, while *focal onset impaired awareness seizures* (also known as complex partial seizures) cause a change in consciousness and may begin with an aura. The symptoms of focal seizures depend on their location. Symptoms of seizures that occur in the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes include the following: 
(1) *Temporal lobe seizures* are the most common type of focal onset seizure and may begin with an aura that involves experiencing a strange taste or odor, a rising sensation in the stomach, sudden intense fear or other emotion, or a sense of déjà vu (familiarity) or jamais vu (unfamiliarity). Characteristic symptoms include sweating, dilated pupils, tachycardia, and other autonomic symptoms; lip-smacking, repeated chewing or swallowing, fidgeting, picking at clothing, and other automatisms; and trouble speaking accompanied by impaired comprehension. Causes of temporal lobe seizures include genetic factors (heredity or mutations), traumatic brain injury, brain tumors and infections, and cerebrovascular accidents. Psychological stress is a frequent trigger of temporal lobe seizures (Eggers, 2007).

(2) *Frontal lobe seizures* are the second-most common type of focal onset seizure. They often occur during sleep and last less than 30 seconds. Symptoms include kicking, rocking, bicycle pedaling, and other repetitive movements; abnormal body posturing (e.g., fencing posture); explosive screams or laughter; trouble speaking with intact comprehension; and autonomic symptoms. 

(3) *Parietal lobe seizures* involve tingling, numbness, pain, and other abnormal sensations; feelings of movement (e.g., floating); and distortions in body image (e.g., feeling that a body part is enlarged, shrunken, or absent). 

(4) *Occipital lobe seizures* are characterized by rapid eye blinking, eyelid flutter, and involuntary eye movements; flashing or stationary bright lights, multi-colored circular patterns, and other simple visual hallucinations; and partial blindness, impaired visual acuity, or other visual impairment.
(b) **Generalized Onset Seizures:** Generalized onset seizures affect both hemispheres and include generalized onset motor seizures and generalized onset non-motor seizures. *Generalized onset motor seizures* are also known as tonic-clonic seizures and grand mal seizures. They cause a change in consciousness and include a tonic phase that involves a stiffening of muscles in the face and limbs that’s followed by a clonic phase that involves jerky rhythmic movements in the arms and legs. When consciousness is regained, the person may be depressed, confused, or fatigued and may have no memory for the events that occurred during the seizure. *Generalized onset non-motor seizures* are also known as absence seizures and petit mal seizures and involve a very brief loss of consciousness with a blank stare that may be accompanied by rapid blinking.

2. **Status Epilepticus:** Definitions of status epilepticus (SE) vary, but most describe it as involving a single seizure that continues for a prolonged length of time (e.g., 5 minutes or more) or recurrent seizures that occur without a return to consciousness between them. There are two main types of SE (Jirsch & Hirsch, 2007; Shah et al., 2009): (a) Generalized convulsive SE is characterized by a loss of consciousness and tonic-clonic seizures. (b) Non-convulsive SE is characterized by seizure activity that is apparent on an EEG in the absence of prominent motor symptoms. This type may involve some degree of altered consciousness and other symptoms such as delusions, hallucinations, automatisms, and aphasia. Causes of SE include head trauma, CNS infections, cerebrovascular accidents, drug toxicity, autoimmune disorders, and non-compliance with seizure medications. It is considered to be a medical emergency that requires treating the underlying condition that caused the seizures and administering appropriate medications: Benzodiazepines are generally considered the first-line treatment, with anti-seizure medications being used when benzodiazepines are ineffective and as a maintenance treatment to prevent the recurrence of seizures.

**Migraine Headaches:** Migraine headaches involve an intense, throbbing pain that’s usually on one side of the head and may be accompanied by nausea or vomiting and sensitivity to light or other sensory stimuli. There are two types: *Migraine headaches with aura* are also known as classic migraines and *migraine headaches without aura* are also known as common migraines. Migraines can be triggered by emotional stress or relaxation after stress, abrupt weather changes, alcohol, certain foods, missing a meal, or other factors, and their intensity may be worsened by bending forward and by walking or other routine physical activity. These headaches have been linked to a low level of serotonin and abnormalities in several other neurotransmitters including glutamate, dopamine, and norepinephrine. Preventive medications include antidepressants (e.g., the TCA amitriptyline and SSRI fluoxetine), beta blockers, and anti-epileptics, while acute (abortive) medications include anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs and acetaminophen) and triptans (e.g., sumatriptan). 
**Hypertension:** There are two types of hypertension: *Primary hypertension* is also known as essential hypertension and is diagnosed when the physiological cause of the high blood pressure is unknown, while *secondary hypertension* is diagnosed when high blood pressure is due to a known disease. Primary hypertension accounts for up to 90% of all cases and is referred to as the “silent killer” because it’s often asymptomatic. Factors that increase the risk for primary hypertension include obesity, tobacco use, excessive salt intake, stress, male gender, older age, African American race, and a family history of hypertension. Treatment emphasizes lifestyle changes and may also include a diuretic, beta blocker, ACE inhibitor, or other blood pressure medication and biofeedback or relaxation training.

**Endocrine Disorders:** Disorders of the thyroid gland are among the most common endocrine disorders. *Hyperthyroidism* is caused by hypersecretion of thyroid hormones, and its symptoms include an increased rate of metabolism, elevated body temperature, heat intolerance, increased appetite with weight loss, accelerated heart rate, insomnia, emotional lability, and reduced attention span. *Hypothyroidism* is caused by hyposecretion of hormones and involves a decreased rate of metabolism, reduced appetite with weight gain, slowed heart rate, lowered body temperature, cold intolerance, depression, lethargy, decreased libido, confusion, and impaired concentration and memory.

The pituitary gland is responsible for the release of several hormones including antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which is also known as vasopressin and is responsible for the amount of water excreted in the urine. A low level of ADH due to a tumor, infection, stroke, pituitary surgery, or other factor can cause *central diabetes insipidus*. Its symptoms include frequent and excessive urination, extreme thirst, dehydration, constipation, weight loss, and low blood pressure. (When diabetes insipidus is caused by a failure of the kidneys to respond to ADH, it’s referred to as nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.)
The pancreas maintains the body’s blood glucose balance through its control over the release of insulin and other hormones. When the pancreas releases too much insulin (e.g., as the result of a tumor), blood glucose levels decrease and can cause *hypoglycemia*. From mild to severe, symptoms of hypoglycemia include nervousness, shaking, sweating, hunger, dizziness, irritability, confusion or disorientation, weakness, sleepiness, pallor, blurred vision, tingling or numb lips and tongue, headaches, fast or irregular heartbeat, clumsiness, seizures, and loss of consciousness. Hypoglycemia can also be caused by a high dose of insulin or other diabetic medication, skipping meals, exercising more than usual, excessive alcohol consumption, severe hepatitis or cirrhosis of the liver, and adrenal and pituitary gland disorders. 

When the pancreas releases too little insulin or the body is unable to use the insulin the pancreas produces, blood glucose levels increase and can cause *diabetes mellitus*. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease that destroys insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. There is evidence that a genetic predisposition is the primary risk factor for Type 1 diabetes and that the autoimmune response can be triggered by a viral infection and other factors. Type 2 diabetes is the more common type of diabetes and occurs when the pancreas produces an insufficient amount of insulin or the body is unable to use the insulin produced by the pancreas. Risk factors for Type 2 diabetes include a genetic predisposition, being overweight, having a sedentary lifestyle, and being over 45 years of age. The risk is also higher for members of certain racial/ethnic groups including Native Americans, African Americans, and Hispanic/Latino Americans. Symptoms of Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes include extreme hunger and thirst, frequent urination, unexplained weight loss, fatigue, blurred vision, numbness or tingling in the hands or feet, and frequent infections.

**Neurological Diagnostic Tests:** Electroencephalography and neuroimaging techniques are used to assess neurological diseases and conditions.
1. **Electroencephalography (EEG):** EEG measures the electrical impulses used by neurons to communicate with each other and uses small electrodes (sensors) that are placed on the scalp to assess the impulses of groups of neurons in the area of the cortex adjacent to each electrode. The electrodes are connected to a computer that records electrical impulses as brain waves on continuous graph paper or a computer screen. On the recording, electrical activity takes the form of wavy lines that indicate the frequency and amplitude of the brain waves detected by each electrode. EEG is useful for quickly identifying changes in brain activity in response to stimuli; assisting with the diagnosis of seizure disorders, brain injuries and tumors, and sleep disorders; and confirming brain death.

2. **Neuroimaging Techniques:** Two types of neuroimaging techniques are used to diagnose neurological disorders: *Structural techniques* include computerized axial tomography (CT scan), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and are used to identify structural changes due, for example, to traumatic brain injury, strokes, tumors, degenerative diseases, and infections. CT and MRI are used to identify abnormalities in the density of brain tissue. Advantages of CT are that scanners are usually available in hospital emergency rooms, and CT costs less than an MRI and provides images more quickly. A disadvantage is that CT exposes patients to ionizing radiation (x-rays). An advantage of MRI is that it produces more detailed, three-dimensional images than CT does and, consequently, can detect microhemorrhages, contusions (small areas of bruising), and gliosis (scarring) that cannot be detected in a CT scan. Disadvantages are that MRI requires patients to remain motionless for a long period of time and requires the use of earplugs or headphones because of the loud noise produced by the MRI scanner. DTI is an MRI-based neuroimaging technique that is used to assess the structural integrity of white matter tracts (myelinated axons) that connect different regions of the brain. It does this by identifying abnormalities in the rate and direction of the movement (diffusion) of water molecules along the axons. In addition to evaluating the effects of traumatic brain injury and concussion, DTI is used to study white matter abnormalities associated with neurocognitive disorder, schizophrenia, autism, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, and other conditions as well as the normal organization and development of white matter. 

*Functional techniques* provide information about brain activity by assessing glucose consumption or oxygen consumption, with the latter being assessed by measuring regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) or blood volume (Small, 2006). These techniques include positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and functional MRI (fMRI). PET and SPECT both use radioactive tracers (radiotracers) that are injected into the bloodstream to measure brain activity; fMRI, like MRI, uses magnetic fields and radio waves.

Note that neuroimaging techniques are not sufficiently accurate to diagnose neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease; however, they’re often used in conjunction with other techniques to assist with the diagnosis by ruling out other causes of cognitive impairment. Of the structural techniques, MRI is usually preferred to CT because it provides an accurate three-dimensional measure of the volume of brain structures, but CT may be used instead for the reasons described above or because MRI is unavailable. Of the functional techniques, fluorodeoxyglucose PET (FDG-PET) assesses glucose metabolism and is useful for distinguishing between Alzheimer’s disease and other neurocognitive disorders, especially frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder.