# Psychopharmacology – Antipsychotics and Antidepressants

Psychoactive drugs are also known as psychotropic drugs and “are substances that act on the central nervous system … and generate physical, cognitive, and behavioral changes” (Reichert et al., 2021, p. 173). For the exam, you want to be familiar with the uses, effects, and side effects of the drugs included in this section and the following section of the physiological psychology and psychopharmacology content summary. Note that EPPP questions are more likely to refer to drugs by their generic names or their generic and brand names than by their brand names only.

**Antipsychotics:**  The antipsychotic drugs are also known as neuroleptics and are categorized as first, second, or third generation.
**1. First-Generation Antipsychotics:** The first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs) are also known as typical antipsychotics and include chlorpromazine (Thorazine), haloperidol (Haldol), thioridazine (Mellaril), and fluphenazine (Prolixin). These drugs are used to treat schizophrenia and other disorders with psychotic symptoms and are more effective for treating positive symptoms than negative symptoms. The FGAs are dopamine antagonists that exert their therapeutic effects primarily by blocking dopamine (D2) receptors.

The major side effects of the FGAs fall into three categories: (a) *Anticholinergic side effects* are most likely with low potency FGAs (e.g., chlorpromazine and thioridazine) and include dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, constipation, and tachycardia. (b) *Extrapyramidal side effects* are most likely with high potency FGAs (e.g., haloperidol and fluphenazine) and include parkinsonism (resting tremor, muscle rigidity, slowed movement), dystonia (uncontrollable muscle contractions), akathisia (a sense of inner restlessness), and tardive dyskinesia. Tardive dyskinesia is potentially life threatening, begins after long-term drug use, and is more common in women and older adults. It starts with involuntary, rhythmic movements of the tongue, face, and jaw and, over time, may also affect the limbs and trunk. Tardive dyskinesia is irreversible for some patients and is treated by gradually withdrawing the drug, administering a benzodiazepine, or switching to a second-generation antipsychotic. (c) *Neuroleptic malignant syndrome* (NMS) is a rare life-threatening side effect. Its symptoms include muscle rigidity, a high fever, autonomic dysfunction (e.g., unstable blood pressure, tachycardia, excessive sweating), and an altered mental state (e.g., confusion, combativeness). Treatment involves having the person stop taking the drug at the first sign of symptoms and providing him/her with supportive therapy (e.g., hydration, cooling).  

2. **Second-Generation Antipsychotics:** The second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) are also known as atypical antipsychotics and include clozapine (Clozaril), risperidone (Risperdal), olanzapine (Zyprexa), and quetiapine (Seroquel). Like the FGAs, they are used to treat schizophrenia and other disorders with psychotic symptoms, and some are FDA-approved as adjunctive treatment for major depressive disorder and/or bipolar disorder. There is evidence that the SGAs are as effective as or more effective than the FGAs for treating the positive symptoms of schizophrenia and that some SGAs may also reduce negative symptoms (e.g., Leucht et al., 2009). These drugs may also be effective for patients who cannot tolerate or do not respond to FGAs, with clozapine being the only FDA-approved antipsychotic for treatment-resistant schizophrenia. The SGAs are dopamine-serotonin antagonists: They alleviate positive symptoms primarily by blocking dopamine (especially D2, D3, and D4) receptors and negative and cognitive symptoms primarily by blocking serotonin (5-HT2A) receptors (e.g., Stepnicki et al., 2018).

The SGAs are less likely than the FGAs to cause extrapyramidal side effects; however, they can cause anticholinergic effects, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and metabolic syndrome. Metabolic syndrome involves substantial weight gain, high blood pressure, insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, and increased risk for diabetes mellitus and heart disease. Clozapine and, to a lesser extent, other SGAs can also cause neutropenia and agranulocytosis, which is a severe form of neutropenia. Both conditions are potentially life-threatening and involve dangerously low levels of neutrophils, which are a type of white blood cell that is an essential part of the body’s immune system. Patients taking clozapine must have regular blood tests and, when neutrophil levels are too low, treatment may include discontinuing the drug and prescribing an antibiotic for infections and medications to improve the body’s ability to produce neutrophils more quickly.

3. **Third-Generation Antipsychotics:**  The third-generation antipsychotics (TGAs) include aripiprazole (Abilify), brexpiprazole (Rexulti), and cariprazine (Vraylar). They are used to treat schizophrenia and as adjunctive treatment for bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder. The TGAs are referred to as dopamine-serotonin stabilizers and are categorized as partial agonists even though they have both antagonist and agonist effects: With regard to dopamine, the TGAs exert their effects primarily at D2 receptors where they (a) act as antagonists by reducing dopamine levels in areas of the brain where dopamine levels are too high and thereby reduce positive symptoms and (b) act as partial agonists by increasing dopamine levels in areas of the brain where dopamine levels are too low and thereby reduce negative and cognitive symptoms. These drugs similarly affect serotonin levels by acting as antagonists at 5-HT2A receptors and partial agonists at 5-HT1A receptors, which reduces depression, anxiety, and cognitive symptoms (e.g., Mohr et al., 2022; Patterson et al., 2021; Steele, 2023). [Note: It was not until the release of brexpiprazole and cariprazine that the term "third-generation antipsychotics" became widely used. Prior to that time, aripiprazole was included with the atypical (second-generation) antipsychotics even though its mechanism of action differs from the actions of other atypical drugs.]

There is evidence that the TGAs are similar to SGAs in terms of effectiveness but have fewer side effects (Ricci et al., 2024): For example, they are less likely to cause extrapyramidal side effects, tardive dyskinesia, anticholinergic effects, and metabolic syndrome. However, they do produce some side effects that vary somewhat depending on the specific TGA but may include akathisia, fatigue, headache, nausea, and anxiety. There is also evidence that aripiprazole can cause addictive gambling and other impulse control disorders (Akbari et al., 2024).

**Antidepressants:** The major antidepressants include the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), norepinephrine dopamine reuptake inhibitors (NDRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).
1. **SSRIs:**  The SSRIs include fluoxetine (Prozac, Sarafem), fluvoxamine (Luvox), paroxetine (Paxil), sertraline (Zoloft), citalopram (Celexa), and escitalopram (Lexapro). They are the most frequently prescribed antidepressants and are generally considered to be the first-line pharmacological treatment for major depressive disorder and persistent depressive disorder. Some of these drugs are also used to treat other disorders including premenstrual dysphoric disorder, OCD, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, PTSD, bulimia nervosa, premature ejaculation, and bipolar I disorder. Note that, as a treatment for bipolar I disorder, SSRIs (and other antidepressants) are usually prescribed in conjunction with a mood stabilizer because they can cause rapid cycling or trigger mania or hypomania when used alone (McCarron et al., 2019). The SSRIs are indirect agonists that exert their effects by blocking the reuptake of serotonin by presynaptic neurons, thereby increasing its availability at multiple postsynaptic serotonin (e.g., 5-HT1A, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C) receptors (American Psychological Association, n.d.; Peng et al., 2014).

The SSRIs are comparable to the TCAs in terms of effectiveness but have fewer side effects and are safer in overdose (e.g., are less cardiotoxic). Side effects of the SSRIs include mild anticholinergic effects, gastrointestinal disturbances, insomnia, anxiety, and sexual dysfunction. Sexual dysfunction affects both men and women; includes difficulties related to desire, arousal, and orgasm; and can persist after the drug is discontinued. Abrupt cessation of an SSRI can cause *discontinuation syndrome*, which involves headaches, dizziness, mood lability, impaired concentration, sleep disturbances, and flu-like symptoms. Also, combining an SSRI with an MAOI, lithium, or other serotonergic drug can cause *serotonin syndrome*, which is potentially fatal and involves extreme agitation, confusion, autonomic instability, hyperthermia, tremor, seizures, and delirium. Treatment for serotonin syndrome requires immediate withdrawal of the serotonergic drugs and providing appropriate medical interventions for its symptoms. In addition, people taking an SSRI (or MAOI) can develop *tachyphylaxis*, which is also known as antidepressant tolerance and antidepressant poop-out. It occurs when a patient with depression “loses a previously antidepressant treatment response despite staying on the same drug and dosage for maintenance treatment” (Targum, 2014). Common signs of tachyphylaxis include apathy, fatigue, dulled cognitive functioning, sleep disturbance, and sexual dysfunction. Treatment strategies for tachyphylaxis include increasing the current drug dosage; switching to a different SSRI; switching to an SNRI (e.g., venlafaxine) or a TCA (e.g., clomipramine), which have lower rates of tachyphylaxis; and augmenting the current SSRI with another medication (e.g., TCA, bupropion, lithium, atypical antipsychotic) or depression-focused therapy (Kinrys et al., 2019). Finally, like other antidepressants, the SSRIs have a delayed onset: Initial therapeutic effects occur by about 2 to 4 weeks, with full effects not being achieved until 6 to 8 weeks (Antidepressant Medication, 2017; Ferri, 2020).

2. **SNRIs:** The SNRIs include venlafaxine (Effexor), duloxetine (Cymbalta), desvenlafaxine (Pristiq), and levomilnacipran (Fetzima). They are used to treat major depressive disorder, social anxiety disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and neuropathic pain and other pain disorders. SNRIs are similar to SSRIs in terms of effectiveness, although there is some evidence that they may be more effective for severe depression (e.g., Thronson & Pagalilauan, 2014). The SNRIs are indirect agonists that exert their therapeutic effects by blocking the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine by presynaptic neurons, thereby increasing their availability at postsynaptic receptors.

The side effects of the SNRIs are similar to those of the SSRIs and, like the SSRIs, they can cause discontinuation syndrome when abruptly stopped and serotonin syndrome when combined with other serotonergic drugs. Because of their effects on norepinephrine, they can elevate blood pressure and may be contraindicated for patients with hypertension or heart problems.   

3. **NDRIs:** The NDRIs include bupropion (Wellbutrin, Zyban), which is used to treat major depressive disorder and assist with smoking cessation and exerts its therapeutic effects by inhibiting the reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine at synapses. Side effects include skin rash, decreased appetite and weight loss, agitation, insomnia, dizziness, and seizures. Advantages of bupropion are that it causes few anticholinergic effects, does not cause sexual dysfunction, and is not cardiotoxic. Note that bupropion and other antidepressants that increase levels of norepinephrine and dopamine have an energizing effect, which means they’re useful for patients who have low energy and motivation but not for those who have insomnia or are very anxious.

4. **TCAs:**  The TCAs are categorized as tertiary or secondary amines based on their chemical structure. The tertiary amines include amitriptyline (Elavil), imipramine (Tofranil), clomipramine (Anafranil), and doxepin (Sinequan) and exert their effects by inhibiting the reuptake of both serotonin and norepinephrine, with some having a stronger effect on serotonin. Secondary amines include nortriptyline (Pamelor) and desipramine (Norpramin) and are more potent at inhibiting the reuptake of norepinephrine than serotonin. The TCAs are used to treat major depressive disorder, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder (especially clomipramine), and neuropathic pain (especially nortriptyline and amitriptyline).

The side effects of the TCAs include cardiovascular effects (e.g., hypertension, tachycardia, orthostatic hypotension), anticholinergic effects, sedation, weight gain, and sexual dysfunction. The secondary amines have fewer side effects than the tertiary amines (e.g., they are less likely to cause sedation and anticholinergic effects). There is evidence that, when used to treat bipolar depression, antidepressants can induce a manic or hypomanic episode, with TCAs being most likely to do so (e.g., Gitlin, 2018). Finally, because the TCAs are cardiotoxic and lethal in overdose, they must be prescribed with caution for patients who have heart disease or are suicidal. 

5. **MAOIs: The** MAOIs include phenelzine (Nardil), isocarboxazid (Marplan), and tranylcypromine (Parnate). These drugs are useful for patients with treatment-resistant depression or atypical depression, which involves reversed vegetative symptoms such as hypersomnia, increased appetite, and reactive dysphoria. The enzyme monoamine oxidase deactivates norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine, and the MAOIs increase the levels of these neurotransmitters by inhibiting the activity of this enzyme.

Side effects include anticholinergic effects, orthostatic hypotension, sedation, and sexual dysfunction. They may also produce a *hypertensive crisis* when taken in conjunction with certain drugs (e.g., amphetamines, antihistamines) or food containing tyramine (e.g., aged cheese and meat, soy products, beer, red wine, sauerkraut, fava beans, ripe bananas). Symptoms of a hypertensive crisis include a severe throbbing headache, neck pain or stiffness, rapid heart rate, nausea and vomiting, sweating, sensitivity to light, confusion, and delirium.  