# Sensation and Perception


*Sensation* is “the process by which our sensory receptors and nervous system receive and represent stimulus energies from our environment,” while *perception* is “the process of organizing and interpreting sensory information … [which enables] us to recognize meaningful objects and events” (Myers, 2010, p. 189). Bottom-up and top-down processing help explain how sensation and perception are integrated: Bottom-up (data-driven) processing refers to processing that begins with incoming sensory information and continues upward to the brain where it is perceived, interpreted, and stored. Top-down (concept-driven) processing refers to processing that begins with the brain’s use of preexisting knowledge and expectations to interpret incoming sensory information.

**Vision:** The physical stimuli for vision are light waves that are absorbed by photoreceptors (light-sensitive receptors) in the retina. There are two types of photoreceptors: The cones work best in bright light and are responsible for visual acuity (sharpness and precise detail) and the perception of color. The rods do not perceive color but are most important for peripheral vision and, because they’re more sensitive to light, are responsible for vision in dim light.
**1. Theories of Color Vision:** Trichromatic theory and opponent process theory are the main theories of color vision. According to *trichromatic theory*, the retina contains three types of color receptors (cones) – red, blue, and green. Trichromatic theory applies to the initial level of processing in the retina. *Opponent-process theory* proposes that there are three types of opponent-process cells – red/green, blue/yellow, and white/black. It applies to processing beyond the retina and explains red/green and blue/yellow colorblindness and the phenomenon of negative afterimages, which occurs when a person stares at and then looks away from an object of one color and sees an afterimage of the object in a complimentary color.

**2. Color Blindness:** Red-green color blindness is the most frequent type, and it is most often due to a genetic mutation but can also be the result of injury or disease (e.g., diabetes, multiple sclerosis). The genetic form is caused by a recessive gene on the X chromosome. It is more common in males because they have only one X chromosome (which they inherit from their mothers), and inheriting the single mutated gene is sufficient to cause color blindness. However, females have two X chromosomes (one from their mothers and one from their fathers), and they are color blind only when they inherit the mutated gene from both parents. In contrast to red-green color blindness, blue-yellow color blindness is caused by an autosomal (non-sex) dominant gene and, consequently, affects males and females equally. 

**3. Depth Perception:** The ability to perceive depth depends on a combination of binocular and monocular cues. *Binocular cues* depend on both eyes, are responsible for depth perception of objects that are relatively close, and include retinal disparity and convergence.  Retinal disparity occurs because our two eyes see objects from two different views and, the closer an object, the greater the disparity. Convergence refers to the tendency of the eyes to turn inward as an object gets closer and vice versa. *Monocular cues* depend on one eye and are responsible for depth perception of objects at greater distances. They include the relative size of objects, the overlap (interposition) of objects, linear perspective, texture gradients, and the relative motion of objects (motion parallax).

**Pain:** The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) defines pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue damage” (Raja et al., 2020, p. 1976). Physical pain ordinarily occurs when nociceptors (pain receptors) in the skin, muscles, joints, and internal organs detect thermal, mechanical, or chemical stimuli that are damaging or threatening to damage normal tissue. However, the experience of pain is affected by several factors. For example, *gate control theory* (Melzack & Wall, 1965) distinguishes between two types of nerve fibers in the spinal cord: Small unmyelinated fibers are responsible for transmitting most pain signals to the brain, while larger myelinated fibers transmit other sensory signals. It proposes that transmission of pain signals to the brain by small fibers depends on a “gate” in the spinal cord: The gate is normally opened by incoming pain signals but can be closed by the transmission of non-pain signals by large fibers and by the transmission of information from the brain. Consequently, pain can be relieved, for example, by applying heat or cold to the affected area of the body or by distraction (e.g., watching a movie, playing a game), guided imagery, or hypnosis.

**Synesthesia:** Synesthesia is “a condition in which sensations in one sensory modality spontaneously trigger an associated sensation in another modality” (Freberg, 2010, p. 222). Synesthesia can involve any of the senses, but the most common type is grapheme-color synesthesia, in which numbers or letters are associated with specific colors. Synesthesia seems to have a genetic component, and there’s evidence that it’s due to increased cross-activation and cross-connectivity between the brain’s sensory areas.

**Psychophysics:** Psychophysics is the study of the relationship between the magnitude of physical stimuli and psychological sensations. Explanations for this relationship are provided by Weber’s law, Fechner’s law, and Stevens’s power law, and signal detection theory.

1. **Weber’s Law:** Weber’s law predicts that the just noticeable difference (JND) for a stimulus is a constant proportion, regardless of the intensity of the original stimulus. For example, the proportion is always 2% for weight, which means that, to notice a change in weight, a second object must be at least 2% lighter or heavier than the first object. Weber’s law applies only to some stimuli and to intensities in the mid-range.

2. **Fechner’s Law:** Fechner's law is also known as the Fechner-Weber law and predicts that there’s a logarithmic relationship between psychological sensation and the magnitude of a physical stimulus. In other words, the JND “grows to an increasingly greater degree with each linear increment in intensity” (Buckworth, Dishman, O’Connor, & Tomporowski, 2013). Like Weber’s law, Fechner’s law works for only some stimuli; however, it’s more accurate than Weber’s law for stimuli at extreme intensities.

3. **Stevens’s Power Law:** Stevens's power law is more accurate than Weber’s and Fechner’s laws, and it proposes that there’s an exponential relationship between psychological sensation and the magnitude of a physical stimulus and that the exponent varies for different stimuli. Stevens based his law on research using the method of magnitude estimation, which required participants to assign numbers to stimuli based on the sensations they elicited. For instance, if a subject assigned a 3 to one weight and believed the next weight was twice as heavy, the subject would assign the second weight a 6. Using this method, Stevens found that the relationship between physical stimuli and psychological sensation differs for different stimuli.

4. **Signal Detection Theory:** Signal detection theory (SDT) was originally applied to psychophysics in the 1960s (Green & Swets, 1966) but has since been applied to other areas of psychology, including recognition memory, attention, speech perception, and clinical diagnosis. In contrast to the psychophysical laws described above, SDT assumes that perception of a stimulus (signal) is the outcome of both sensory and decision-making processes. It proposes that the decision-making process is always accompanied by some degree of uncertainty, which is caused by the presence of background noise (e.g., random neural activity in the perceiver’s perceptual system, the perceiver’s levels of motivation and fatigue, distractions in the environment). It also proposes that decision-making is affected by a perceiver’s sensitivity and decision criterion: *Sensitivity* is the perceiver’s ability to distinguish between the stimulus and noise. The *decision criterion* is also referred to as decision bias and response bias and refers to the perceiver’s willingness or tendency to say that a stimulus is present in ambiguous situations. Overall, the greater a perceiver’s sensitivity, the greater the potential for accuracy in perceiving a stimulus; however, accuracy is also affected by the person’s decision criterion. For example, if two people have the same level of sensitivity but differ in terms of willingness to say that a stimulus is present, they will likely make different decisions about the presence of weak stimuli that are accompanied by background noise.  
In a typical SDT experiment, subjects are exposed to numerous trials in which a noisy background is presented in conjunction with a weak signal (e.g., a tone) or no signal and asked to say “yes” if they detect the signal or “no” if they do not detect it. There are four possible decision outcomes in this experiment: (a) A “hit” occurs when the stimulus is present and the person says it is present. (b) A “false alarm” occurs when the stimulus is not present but the persons says that it is. (c) A “miss” occurs when the stimulus is present but the person says it is not present. (d) A “correct rejection” occurs when the stimulus is not present and the person says it is not present. Data collected from this type of experiment can be used to obtain an estimate of a person’s sensitivity and to estimate the effects of a person’s decision criterion on the likelihood that the person will make correct decisions. For example, the data can be used to calculate d’ (d-prime), which is an estimate of sensitivity, and to construct a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, which indicates how often false alarms and hits are likely to occur for different levels of sensitivity and how changes in the decision criterion affect the likelihood of false alarms and hits for different levels of sensitivity.