{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 .SFNS-Regular_wdth_opsz110000_GRAD_wght2580000;\f2\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Menlo-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;\red234\green234\blue234;
\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0\c87843;\cssrgb\c93333\c93333\c93333;
\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww23660\viewh17480\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf3 \cb4 \strokec3 Extracted Text
\f0\b0 \cf0 \cb1 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf0 \cb5 \
      BIOLOGICAL                BASES        OF \
\
                  BEHAVIOR \
\
                      SECTION    2 \
\
                    PsychPrep \
                    PASS EFFICIENTLY \
\
     SECTION 2: BIOLOGICAL BASES \
                  OF BEHAVIOR \
\
            BASIC NEUROSCIENCE \
\
           2.1 THE NERVOUS SYSTEM \
\
All behavior (e.g., movement, thought, sleep) results from activity in the cells of the \
nervous system. The nervous system has two main divisions: a) the central nervous system \
(CNS), which consists of the brain and spinal cord; and b) the peripheral nervous system \
(PNS), which consists of the nerves that go to and from the brain and spinal cord (i.e., the \
cranial nerves, spinal nerves and peripheral ganglia). \
\
Below is an outline of the organization of the nervous system. This is followed by detailed \
descriptions of each area. \
\
              OUTLINE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM \
\
              1. Peripheral Nervous System \
               A. Somatic Nervous System \
               B. Autonomic Nervous System \
                >Sympathetic Nervous System \
                 >Parasympathetic Nervous System \
              II. Central Nervous System \
               A. Spinal Cord \
               B. Brain \
                B1. Cerebrum \
                 > Cerebral Cortex \
                 >Subcortical Brain Areas \
                B2. Cerebellum \
                B3. Brain Stem \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
I. THE PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM \
\
The peripheral nervous system has two main subdivisions, the somatic nervous system and \
the autonomic nervous system. \
\
A. THE SOMATIC NERVOUS SYSTEM \
\
The somatic nervous system sends and receives sensory messages that control voluntary \
motor movement of the skeletal (striated or lined) muscles. \
\
B. THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM \
\
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) controls automatic or involuntary bodily functions \
of the smooth muscles and glands, including digestion, heart rate, and breathing. The \
primary function of the ANS is to maintain homeostasis. The ANS is further subdivided \
into two systems, the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system. \
\
>THE SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) \
is the body's "mobilizing" system. Also known as the "fight or flight" system, it is \
dominant during times of stress. When this mobilizing system is activated, hormones are \
released into the bloodstream. These hormones result in increased respiration, heart rate, \
and blood pressure and decreases in the processes of digestion and elimination. \
\
>THE PARASYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM The parasympathetic nervous \
system (PNS) is the "energy conserving" system, and is dominant when a person is relaxed. \
The main function of the PNS is basic body maintenance, which is accomplished by \
slowing heart rate, blood pressure and respiration, while increasing digestion and \
elimination. \
\
In general, it is healthier to have the parasympathetic system dominant over the \
sympathetic. \
\
HINT: The SYMPATHetic nervous system SYMPATHizes with your Stress by \
mobilizing your body for fight or flight. \
\
HINT: The PARAsympathetic nervous system helps you PARAchute down from your \
stress. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
HINT: Interventions such as biofeedback focus on helping people decrease sympathetic \
arousal. \
\
II. THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS) \
\
The central nervous system (CNS) consists of the spinal cord and brain, with sensory \
(afferent) neurons carrying information into the CNS, and motor (efferent) neurons \
carrying information away from the CNS to muscles and glands. \
\
A. THE SPINAL CORD \
\
The spinal cord is divided into four regions. The cervical or neck region includes vertebrae \
C1 through C7. The thoracic or chest region includes vertebrae T1 through T12. The \
lumbar or back region includes vertebrae L1 through L5. Finally, the sacral region includes \
the S1 vertebra. When the spinal cord is damaged, muscles served by sections of the spinal \
cord below the damaged area do not function normally, and paralysis may result. \
\
Severing the spinal cord anywhere between C1 and C5 results in paralysis in all four limbs \
termed quadriplegia ("quad" means four and "plegia" means paralysis). \
\
Paraplegia refers to paralysis in the legs only. Severing the spinal cord at C6 or C7 results \
in both paraplegia and partial paralysis of the arms. Severing the spinal cord at TI or below \
results in paraplegia only. \
\
Incomplete severing of the spinal cord may result in muscle weakness, termed paresis, \
rather than full paralysis. Strokes can also cause paresis. \
\
Even when the spinal cord is damaged, many reflexes still remain intact (e.g., the knee jerk \
reflex). A male who is paralyzed can therefore achieve an erection (a reflex). He may even \
be able to ejaculate and experience sensations of orgasm. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
B. THE BRAIN \
\
The brain is the control center for all voluntary and most involuntary behavior. The major \
divisions of the brain are: the cerebrum, consisting of the cerebral cortex and subcortical \
areas; the cerebellum; and the brain stem. \
\
B1. THE CEREBRUM \
\
The cerebrum is involved with complex thought, perception, and action. The outer layer of \
the cerebrum is the cerebral cortex and the inside layer contains the subcortical areas. The \
cerebrum can be compared to an orange: the cortex is like the rind of the orange and the \
subcortical areas are like the fruit of the orange. \
\
>THE CEREBRAL CORTEX The cerebral cortex, the outside surface of the brain, is at \
birth the least developed part of the brain. It is, however, more developed in humans than \
in other animals. The surface of the cerebral cortex is highly convoluted with folds (gyri). \
These folds allow for expansion of the cortical surface area without increasing the size of \
the brain. \
\
  THE HEMISPHERES The cerebral cortex is divided into halves, the left and right \
  hemispheres, which are connected with a thick band of nerve fibers, the corpus \
  callosum. \
\
  The left hemisphere controls the right side of the body, while the right hemisphere \
  controls the left side of the body. Although the two hemispheres appear to be mirror \
  images of one another, there are important distinctions in their respective functions. \
\
     THE LEFT HEMISPHERE The left hemisphere is dominant in about 97% of all \
     people. Dominance refers to control over language, which includes reading, \
     writing. speaking, spelling, naming, as well as motor control. About 90% of the \
     population is right handed, and almost all right-handers are left hemisphere \
     dominant; of the 10% of the population that is left-handed, most of them (about \
     75% - 80%) are also left hemisphere dominant. The left hemisphere is also involved \
     in verbal memory, as well as in thinking that is rational, analytical, logical, and \
     abstract. \
\
     For most people damage to the left hemisphere may result in aphasia (speech \
     disorder), other language problems (e.g., agraphia, anomia), apraxia (motor \
     disorder), and/or difficulties with the right side of the body. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
     HINT: Left is for Language and Logic. \
\
     THE RIGHT HEMISPHERE The right hemisphere is involved with perceptual, \
     visuospatial, artistic, musical, and intuitive activities. The right hemisphere is also \
     associated with the maintenance of body image, and the comprehension and \
     expression of visual, facial, and verbal emotion. \
\
     Damage to the right hemisphere may result in cognitive abnormalities that include \
     left side hemi-neglect, prosopagnosia, visual-perceptual disturbances, and agnosia \
     for musical sounds. Affective abnormalities that may occur include indifference, \
     euphoria, hysteria, depression, mania, disinhibition, impulsivity, and abnormal \
     sexual behavior. \
\
  THE LOBES Each hemisphere is divided into four lobes -- frontal, parietal, temporal, \
  and occipital. Thus one can speak of eight different combinations: the right frontal lobe, \
  the left frontal lobe, the right temporal lobe, etc. The lobes are separated from each \
  other by elongated grooves (sulci). The central sulcus separates the frontal and parietal \
  lobes; the lateral sulcus separates the temporal lobes from the frontal and parietal lobes. \
\
     THE FRONTAL LOBES The frontal lobes are located at the top front portion of \
     each hemisphere and occupy the largest portion of our brain, about 1/3 of the entire \
     brain. There are three main divisions of the frontal lobes: the prefrontal cortex, the \
     premotor area, and the motor area. The prefrontal cortex is critical to personality. \
     emotionality, inhibition, planning and initiative, abstract thinking, judgment, and \
     higher mental functions (e.g., cognitive flexibility) - that which makes us unique \
     human beings. The premotor area is involved in planning movement, while the \
     motor area instigates voluntary muscle movement. Broca's area is located in the \
     left frontal lobe and controls the muscles that produce speech. \
\
     Damage to the frontal lobes is most often caused by traumatic brain injury, a stroke, \
     or a tumor, and may result in loss of movement of various body parts (paralysis), \
     changes in personality, emotional lability, perseveration, inattention, difficulty with \
     problem solving, and inability to express language (Broca's Aphasia). \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
     THE PARIETAL LOBES The parietal lobes, located just behind the frontal \
     lobes, contain the primary sensory areas that process somatosensory information. \
     The parietal lobes enable us to integrate sensations of touch such as shape, size, \
     weight, and texture, merging these into a three-dimensional experience of objects \
     around us. The parietal lobes also process sensations of pain, heat, and \
     proprioception (ability to sense position, location, and movement of the body). The \
     right parietal lobe plays a key role in directing attention, as well as in visual and \
     spatial skills. The left parietal lobe is involved in overlearned motor routines and \
     linguistic skills such as reading, writing, and naming objects. \
\
     Damage to the parietal lobes is more often caused by a stroke, and may result in \
     inability to name objects (anomia), inability to write (agraphia), problems with \
     reading (alexia), difficulty doing math (acalculia), difficulty drawing objects, \
     difficulty distinguishing right from left, lack of awareness of certain body parts \
     which leads to difficulty with self-care, problems with eye-hand coordination, and \
     problems with attending to more than one object at a time. \
\
     Gerstmann's syndrome, which involves lesions of the left parietal lobe, results in \
     four primary symptoms that include agraphia, acalculia, right-left disorientation, \
     and finger agnosia (difficulty with recognition). People suffering from finger \
     agnosia are unable to recognize their own fingers as part of their body. \
\
     THE TEMPORAL LOBES The temporal lobes, found on the outsides of each \
     hemisphere (i.e., around the temples), contain the primary auditory cortex. The \
     temporal lobes rest on top of, and are connected to, the limbic system (e.g., \
     amygdala and hippocampus), thus the temporal lobes are also involved in emotional \
     behavior and memory. The left temporal lobe is involved in verbal memory and \
     language comprehension (Wernicke's area). The right temporal lobe is involved in \
     visual memory. \
\
     Damage to the temporal lobes most often results from traumatic brain injury, a \
     stroke, or encephalitis. Temporal lobe damage may result in increased aggressive \
     behavior, increased or decreased interest in sexual behavior, interference with \
     memory, and problems understanding speech (Wernicke's aphasia). \
\
\
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
     HINT: The temporal lobes are located around the temples, which are just above \
     the ears; hence the temporal lobes have to with hearing. \
\
     HINT: The phrase "temper, temper" can remind you that the temporal lobes are \
     involved in emotion and aggression. \
\
     THE OCCIPITAL LOBES The occipital lobes, located at the back of the brain, \
     house the primary visual cortex and are involved in sight, reading, and visual \
     images. \
\
     Occipital lobe damage is not very common, but may result from a stroke or tumor. \
     Damage may lead to difficulty recognizing drawn objects, difficulty identifying \
     colors, hallucinations and illusions, inability to recognize words (word blindness). \
     and problems with reading or writing. \
\
     HINT: OCCiptal can make you think of OCular (having to do with eyes). \
\
>SUBCORTICAL BRAIN AREAS Tucked into the center of the brain and surrounded \
by the cerebral cortex are the subcortical brain areas that include the corpus callosum, the \
limbic system, and the basal ganglia. \
\
  THE CORPUS CALLOSUM The corpus callosum is a bundle of nerve fibers that \
  serves as a bridge between the left and right hemispheres, making it possible for the \
  two hemispheres to communicate. \
\
  The right hemisphere controls the left side of the body, and sensory experiences on the \
  left side of the body (e.g., an object placed in the left hand) are always processed by \
  the right hemisphere. In contrast, the left hemisphere controls the right side of the body, \
  and sensory experiences on the right side of the body (e.g., an image flashed in the right \
  visual field) are always processed by the left hemisphere. This is true regardless of \
  whether the person's corpus callosum is intact or severed. \
\
  The corpus callosum allows for communication between the two hemispheres. For \
  example, the left hand touches something hot. This sensation of heat in the left hand is \
  processed in the right hemisphere. With an intact corpus callosum, the right hemisphere \
  then shares that information (via the corpus callosum) with the left hemisphere. The \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
  left hemisphere can express that information in language (e.g., say "it's hot") or analyze \
  it rationally. \
\
  To better understand communication between the two hemispheres, experiments have \
  been undertaken with split-brain patients. These patients have had their corpus \
  callosum severed in an attempt to reduce severe epileptic seizures. With a severed \
  corpus callosum, the right hemisphere still processes the experiences of the left side of \
  the body, and vice-versa. However, information can no longer be shared with or \
  transferred to the opposite hemisphere. In the classic study with split-brain patients, the \
  word HEART was flashed in such a way that HE was seen in the left visual field only. \
  and ART was seen in the right visual field only. Since HE was seen in the left visual \
  field, it was processed by the right hemisphere. With a severed corpus callosum no \
  communication could occur between the two hemispheres, thus patients were unable \
  to verbalize the word (as there is no language in the right hemisphere). They were able \
  to verbalize ART since it was flashed to the right visual fields and therefore directly \
  registered in the left hemisphere, which controls language. \
\
  THE LIMBIC SYSTEM The limbic system, a set of brain structures that forms the \
  inner border of the cortex, is considered our primitive brain and plays a key role in our \
  survival. The limbic system is largely involved in emotions (e.g., fear, anger, pleasure), \
  basic drives (e.g., sex, hunger), learning, olfaction, and memory. The limbic system \
  also influences our autonomic nervous system and endocrine system. Key limbic \
  system structures include the thalamus, hypothalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, and \
  septum. \
\
     THALAMUS The thalamus lies below the corpus callosum. It serves as the major \
     sensory relay center for the brain, receiving input from all our senses except \
     olfaction (smell). The thalamus then integrates and processes this information \
     before projecting it to the appropriate cortical areas. The thalamus is critical in the \
     perception of pain. Abnormalities of the thalamus have also been linked to \
     schizophrenia (e.g., misperceptions of sensory input). \
\
     HYPOTHALAMUS   The hypothalamus is situated just below the thalamus. \
     Through its connections to the endocrine system (e.g., pituitary, thyroid, adrenal \
     glands) and autonomic nervous system, the hypothalamus serves a major role in \
     homeostasis, including regulating temperature, hunger, thirst, sex, cyclic sex \
     hormone secretion (e.g., the menstrual cycle), aggression, and the sleep-wake cycle. \
     Within the hypothalamus, the group of cells called the suprachiasmatic nucleus \
\
\
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
     (SCN) is considered the body's circadian clock because it regulates the sleep-wake \
     cycle. \
\
     The hypothalamus directly influences the pituitary gland by secreting hypothalamic \
     releasing and hypothalamic inhibiting hormones (e.g., thyrotropin-releasing \
     hormone, corticotropin-releasing hormone). In response to hypothalamic \
     hormones, the pituitary secretes its own hormones (e.g., growth hormone, thyroid \
     stimulating hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone) that activate the other \
     endocrine glands (e.g., thyroid, pancreas) [see also section on Endocrine \
     Disorders]. \
\
     HINT: An easy way to remember the functions of the hypothalamus is the phrase \
     "Five F's": fever, feeding, fighting, falling asleep, and f_ing. \
\
     HINT: The Hypothalamus regulates Homeostasis. \
\
     HIPPOCAMPUS   The primary function of the hippocampus is memory, \
     specifically the consolidation of conscious memories. The hippocampus stores new \
     information and events as lasting memories. \
\
     HINT: If you saw a Hippo on Campus, you would remember him. \
\
     AMYGDALA The amygdala attaches emotional significance to sensory input; it \
     is strongly implicated in fear (e.g., startle response), aggression, and emotional \
     memory. The amygdala essentially controls the fear response, receiving and \
     integrating sensory input to determine the level of threat. The amygdala is also \
     involved in the memory of fear, and thus has been linked to PTSD. \
\
     Stimulating the amygdala increases aggression. When the amygdala is removed or \
     destroyed, aggression is diminished. Kluver-Bucy syndrome was first described \
     in monkeys that had undergone bilateral temporal lobectomies with complete \
     removal of the amygdala. Kluver-Bucy syndrome results in placidity, apathy, \
     hypersexuality, hyperphagia (excessive eating), and agnosias (problems with \
     recognition). \
\
     HINT: A for Amygdala, A for increased Aggression \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
     SEPTUM The septum moderates or decreases aggression. Damage to the septum \
     can result in septal rage syndrome. \
\
     HINT: S in Septum, allows you to Simmer down \
\
  THE BASAL GANGLIA The basal ganglia play a vital role in the regulation and \
  coordination of movement and with establishing posture. In order to move smoothly, \
  the cortical areas involved in control of movement (e.g., premotor cortex, primary \
  motor cortex) must receive information from the basal ganglia. Without this \
  information, the cortex is unable to properly direct motor control, and the deficits seen \
  in movement-related disorders are evident. The main nuclei of the basal ganglia include \
  the caudate nucleus, putamen, substantia nigra, globus pallidus, and subthalamic \
  nucleus. \
\
  The basal ganglia are inhibitory. They generally function to put the brakes on \
  movement, allowing us to be still and maintain posture. In order to move voluntarily. \
  the brakes must then be released. \
\
  Dysfunction in the basal ganglia tends to result in one of two problems: the presence \
  of extraneous unwanted movements (e.g., as seen in Huntington's), or difficulty with \
  intended movement (e.g., as seen in Parkinson's). Huntington's disease results from \
  degeneration of the caudate nucleus and putamen, and produces continuous thrusting \
  movements of the face and limbs. Parkinson's disease results from a slow and steady \
  loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, and results in tremor, rigidity. \
  and bradykinesia (slowed movements). Two other disorders related to the basal ganglia \
  abnormalities include Tourette's and OCD. \
\
B2. THE CEREBELLUM \
\
The cerebellum is the second largest structure in the brain, after the cerebrum. It is located \
at the base of the brain, behind the brain stem. In contrast with the basal ganglia, the \
cerebellum provides excitatory inputs that are responsible for maintaining smooth \
movement and coordinating motor activity. The cerebellum also controls the automatic \
adjustments of posture and muscle tone that result in our ability to maintain balance and \
equilibrium and is involved in motor learning. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: The Nervous System \
\
The hallmark of cerebellar disease is ataxia, defined as a lack of coordination of voluntary \
movements in the absence of weakness or sensory loss. Symptoms of cerebellar damage \
may appear as problems with posture, gait, incorrect timing in the activation of muscles, \
disequilibrium, vertigo, inability to reach out and grab objects, difficulty making rapid \
movements, or problems coordinating fine movements. \
\
HINT: Think of "taxi" as movement (although this is not the correct etymology, it's a good \
memory aid). \
\
B3. THE BRAIN STEM \
\
The brain stem lies below the subcortical regions and in front of the cerebellum. It is the \
most primitive part of the brain and is an extension of the spinal cord. Of the 12 cranial \
nerves, 10 begin in the brain stem. The major brain stem areas are the pons, medulla, and \
reticular formation. \
\
>THE PONS AND THE MEDULLA The pons, the upper portion of the brain stem, and \
the medulla, found at the bottom of the brain stem just above the spinal cord, are involved \
in sleep (including initiation of REM sleep), respiration, movement, and cardiovascular \
activity. Damage to the medulla or pons can lead to failure of bodily functions and death. \
\
Cranial nerve XII, the hypoglossal nerve, originates in the medulla; damage to this nerve \
can cause problems with articulation similar to those seen in Broca's aphasia. \
\
>THE RETICULAR FORMATION The reticular formation is a set of interconnected \
nuclei in the brainstem, especially important in awareness, attention, and sleep. Part of the \
reticular formation, the reticular activating system (RAS), projects to the thalamus. The \
RAS is involved in the sleep-wake cycle, serves as a filter for incoming sensory \
information, and mediates alertness. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 2 - Biological: Neurons and the Neurotransmitters \
\
               2.2 NEURONS AND THE \
              NEUROTRANSMITTERS \
\
I. NEURONS \
\
All behavior results from neuronal activity. Each neuron (nerve cell) is a tiny information \
processing system with thousands of connections for receiving and sending electrical and \
chemical signals to other neurons. Neurons, the cells of the brain and spinal cord, \
communicate with each other, with glands, muscles, and other body organs by releasing \
minute amounts of chemical neurotransmitters. \
\
>PARTS OF A NEURON Each neuron contains three parts: dendrites, the cell body or \
soma, and an axon. Dendrites receive information from other neurons by capturing \
neurotransmitters released into the synaptic cleft (space between the neurons) at their \
receptor sites. A neuron may have hundreds or thousands of dendrites. The cell body, or \
soma, integrates information from the dendrites. The soma contains the nucleus, which \
regulates all cell activity and controls hereditary characteristics (e.g., DNA). Finally, the \
axon is a tube-like structure that transmits information. \
\
>ACTION POTENTIAL The action potential plays a vital role in cell-to-cell \
communication. At rest, the outside of the cell contains an excess of sodium ions (Na+), \
 while the inside of the cell contains an excess of potassium ions (K+). The neuron's axon \
is especially sensitive to changes in the electrical charge of its membrane. When a stimulus \
 of sufficient charge reaches a resting neuron, sodium (Na+) outside the cell membrane \
rushes into the cell, creating an action potential (an electrochemical impulse). Potassium \
(K+) then moves outside the cell. The action potential travels the entire length of the axon \
to the boutons (terminal buttons), releasing neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft \
(synapse), the small space separating neurons. \
\
Some of the released neurotransmitters cross the synaptic cleft and bind to receptor sites \
on dendrites of adjacent neurons, thus continuing the chain of communication. In addition \
to this process, reuptake occurs. Neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft are taken up by the \
pre-synaptic neuron's terminal buttons and therefore never reach the adjoining neuron. \
\
>ALL OR NONE PRINCIPLE The phenomenon that guides neuronal firing is the \
"all or none principle," according to which a neuron, if sufficiently stimulated, will fire to \
\
\
\
                              Section 2 - Biological: Neurons and the Neurotransmitters \
\
its fullest extent; if it is not sufficiently stimulated, it will not fire at all. In other words, \
the neuron either fires or doesn't fire. It doesn't fire more strongly or less strongly in \
response to the strength of the stimulation. After firing, there is an absolute refractory \
period, during which the neuron cannot fire, regardless of the strength of stimulation. A \
relative refractory period then follows during which only very intense stimulation will \
cause firing. During the refractory period Na+ and K+ are returned to their original sides, \
with Na+ on the outside and K+ on the inside. \
\
II. THE NEUROTRANSMITTERS \
\
The neurotransmitters are broadly divided into two categories: the classical \
neurotransmitters (the basic ones) and the peptide neurotransmitters. The term agonist is \
applied to any substance that enhances the effect of the neurotransmitter, while antagonist \
refers to any substance that inhibits the neurotransmitter effect. Neurotransmitters are also \
classified as either excitatory (e.g., acetylcholine, norepinephrine, glutamate), if they \
increase the likelihood of an action potential, or as inhibitory (e.g., GABA, endorphins), \
if they decrease the likelihood of an action potential. \
\
A. THE CLASSICAL NEUROTRANSMITTERS \
\
The classical neurotransmitters include acetylcholine, the catecholamines (dopamine, \
norepinephrine), serotonin, and the amino acids. \
\
>ACETYLCHOLINE    (Ach) Acetylcholine is one of the most common \
neurotransmitters. Ach is involved in two significant functions: voluntary movement, and \
memory and cognition. In terms of voluntary movement, it is believed that the poison of \
the black widow spider, which causes paralysis, directly affects acetylcholine. Ach is also \
particularly prevalent in the hippocampus, which is responsible for the consolidation of \
long term memory. Significant deficiencies in Ach are observed in Alzheimer's disease. \
\
>THE CATECHOLAMINES The principle catecholamines found in the nervous system \
are dopamine (DA) and norepinephrine (NE). These neurotransmitters are synthesized \
from dietary tyrosine and phenylalanine. \
\
     DOPAMINE (DA) Dopamine is significantly involved in thought, movement, and \
     emotion. It is also linked to the reward system of the brain. According to the \
     dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia \
     result from excess dopamine, or hyperactivity of the dopaminergic system. This \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 2 - Biological: Neurons and the Neurotransmitters \
\
     theory was originally based on the observation that psychostimulants (e.g., \
     amphetamines) increase dopamine, and can lead to psychosis. The traditional \
     antipsychotics (first generation antipsychotics) have all primarily been dopamine \
     antagonists and have worked specifically by blocking postsynaptic dopamine D2 \
     receptors. The novel antipsychotic agents (second generation antipsychotics) are \
     combined serotonin-dopamine antagonists, and they block postsynaptic dopamine \
     D2 receptors at a lower rate. Nevertheless, it is believed that it is the dopamine \
     antagonism of the novel antipsychotics that reduces the symptoms of psychosis. It \
     has also been found that a deficit in DA transmission at D1 receptors in the \
     prefrontal cortex (PFC) might be implicated in the cognitive impairments and \
     negative symptoms of schizophrenia. \
\
     By contrast, Parkinson's Disease involves a degeneration of neurons in the \
     substantia nigra. As a result, there is a decrease in the dopamine available in the \
     basal ganglia (the group of nerve cells that includes the substantia nigra). L-Dopa \
     (Levodopa), which is a precursor to dopamine, is used to treat the movement \
     components of Parkinson's. \
\
     NOREPINEPHRINE (NE) Norepinephrine, also called noradrenalin, is \
     significantly involved in mood. Depression is associated with a relative deficiency \
     of norepinephrine, while mania is associated with a relative norepinephrine excess. \
\
     Norepinephrine plays a role in pain perception as well as sleep. Norepinephrine is \
     also released as a hormone into the bloodstream, where it causes blood vessels to \
     contract and heart rate to increase. \
\
>SEROTONIN Serotonin (5-HT) is significantly involved in mood, sleep. appetite, \
aggression, sexual activity, and pain perception. Serotonin is produced by dietary \
modification of tryptophan. Dysregulation of serotonin has been associated with suicidality \
and impulsivity. Deficiencies in serotonin are implicated in mood disorders. Levels of \
norepinephrine play a role in whether the mood disorder is expressed as mania (too much \
norepinephrine) or depression (too little norepinephrine). Thus, low serotonin and low \
norepinephrine are linked to depression; low serotonin and high norepinephrine are linked \
to mania. \
\
>THE AMINO ACIDS The amino acids include GABA, Glycine and Glutamate. \
\
     GABA (GAMMA-AMINOBUTYRIC ACID) AND GLYCINE. GABA and \
     glycine are major inhibitory neurotransmitters in the CNS, and they have a calming \
\
\
\
                              Section 2 - Biological: Neurons and the Neurotransmitters \
\
     effect. It is believed that anxiety, as well as epileptic seizures, are associated with \
     insufficient levels of GABA. Benzodiazepines are GABA agonists, increasing the \
     levels of GABA and thereby reducing levels of overarousal. \
\
     GLUTAMATE Glutamate is the most common neurotransmitter and is a major \
     mediator of fast excitatory synaptic transmission. Abnormal glutamate \
     transmission is suspected in Schizophrenia, OCD, Autistic Disorder, and \
     depression. \
\
B. THE PEPTIDE NEUROTRANSMITTERS \
\
There are dozens of peptide neurotransmitters, consisting of long chains of amino acids. \
Two of them, the enkephalins and endorphins, also known as the endogenous opioids, \
help to regulate stress and pain. Another peptide, Substance P, is also involved in pain \
regulation. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: Endocrine Disorders \
\
           2.3 ENDOCRINE DISORDERS \
\
Disruption of endocrine functioning can result in a variety of medical conditions, many of \
which have accompanying psychological symptoms. The pituitary is considered the \
master endocrine gland, as it releases hormones that activate other endocrine glands. The \
pituitary itself is regulated by the hypothalamus. \
\
I. THYROID DISORDERS \
\
The thyroid gland controls metabolism through secretion of the hormone thyroxin. \
\
>HYPERTHYROIDISM Hyperthyroidism (excessive secretion of thyroxin) results in \
weight loss despite increased appetite, heat sensitivity, sweating, diarrhea, tremor and \
palpitations, fatigue, agitated depression, insomnia, impaired memory and judgment, and \
can even involve hallucinations and delusions. The most common form of hyperthyroidism \
is Grave's disease. \
\
>HYPOTHYROIDISM    Hypothyroidism (undersecretion of thyroxin) results in \
unexplained weight gain, sluggishness, fatigue, impaired memory and intellectual \
functioning, and sensitivity to cold. \
\
HINT: Thyroid disorders are one of the first medical disorders to suspect when there are \
psychiatric symptoms. Hyperthyroidism will most likely mimic anxiety or a manic episode. \
Hypothyroidism will most likely mimic depression. \
\
II. DIABETES \
\
The pancreas produces and secretes insulin, which regulates blood sugar levels. Diabetes \
develops when the pancreas does not produce insulin (Type I Diabetes), when the body \
develops a resistance to insulin (Type II Diabetes) or may develop during pregnancy \
(Gestational Diabetes). \
\
The hallmark of diabetes is hyperglycemia (excessive glucose or blood sugar levels). The \
classic symptoms are the "Three P's": polyuria (increased urination), polydipsia (increased \
thirst), and polyphagia (increased appetite). One of the challenges of diabetes management \
\
\
\
                                    Section 2 - Biological: Endocrine Disorders \
\
is attaining tight blood sugar control. Medications used to treat diabetes carry the risk of \
lowering blood sugar levels too much, resulting in hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). \
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include nervousness, irritability, trembling, cold sweats, \
fatigue, rapid heart rate, hunger, headache, and confusion. \
\
>TYPE I DIABETES or Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM), previously called \
Juvenile Onset, usually develops before the age of 30 and requires life-long insulin \
injections. Children with Type I Diabetes generally do well managing their diabetic \
regimen (e.g., diet, injections), but tend to become non-compliant or erratic in compliance \
when they become adolescents. \
\
>TYPE II DIABETES or Non-Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (NIDDM). \
previously called Adult Onset, can sometimes be controlled by diet and exercise alone. \
Most often, however, diabetics require oral medications or even insulin injections. Obesity \
and a sedentary lifestyle are major risk factors for developing this disease. The dramatic \
increase in Type II Diabetes among children has been attributed to rising rates of childhood \
obesity and inactivity. African Americans and Hispanics have a much higher risk of \
developing Type II Diabetes than other ethnic groups. \
\
>GESTATIONAL DIABETES Gestational Diabetes occurs when pregnant women \
without a previous diagnosis of diabetes develop a high blood glucose level. It may precede \
development of Type II Diabetes. Gestational diabetes occurs in 1 to 3 percent of all \
pregnancies. \
\
III. OTHER ENDOCRINE DISORDERS \
\
>HYPOPITUITARISM & HYPERPITUITARISM Hypopituitarism (undersecretion \
of pituitary growth hormones) can cause dwarfism and pubertal delay in children. In adults, \
it can cause gonadal failure (e.g., impotence, infertility), as well as a host of other disorders \
(e.g., hypothyroidism, diabetes, adrenocortical insufficiency). Hyperpituitarism \
(oversection of pituitary growth hormone) involves startling skeletal overgrowth resulting \
in gigantism or acromegaly. \
\
>ADDISON'S DISEASE & CUSHING'S DISEASE The adrenal cortex secretes \
corticosteroids that are involved in the use of energy resources, the inhibition of antibody \
formation, and inflammation. Addison's Disease results from undersecretion of \
corticosteroids, or adrenal insufficiency. Symptoms include apathy, weakness, irritability, \
depression, and gastrointestinal disturbance. Cushing's Disease results from oversecretion \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Endocrine Disorders \
\
of corticosteroids. Symptoms include agitated depression, irritability and emotional \
lability, difficulties with memory and concentration, and even suicide. Physically the \
patient experiences adiposity (swelling and fattening) of the face, neck, and trunk. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
           2.4 COGNITIVE DISORDERS \
\
I. COGNITIVE SYMPTOMS ASSOCIATED WITH \
STROKE, TRAUMA, BRAIN TUMORS, AND \
NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDERS \
\
The impact of a stroke, trauma, or a brain tumor depends on the size, specific location \
(cortical or subcortical region), and cerebral hemisphere affected. \
\
>APHASIA Aphasia refers to the loss of language abilities due to damage (also called \
lesions) in the brain. The specific location of the lesion determines the nature of the \
language disruption. Most people (about 97% of the population) are left hemisphere \
dominant, meaning that the left hemisphere controls language. There are several common \
subtypes of aphasia. \
\
     BROCA'S APHASIA Broca's aphasia results from lesions to the dominant (left) \
     frontal lobe. The hallmark of this aphasia is a severe problem with speech \
     production and articulation (dysarthria), making speech slow and effortful. People \
     with Broca's aphasia speak in short phrases punctuated by lengthy pauses. Their \
     speech has a telegraphic quality, in which articles (the, an, a), conjunctions, and \
     other small words are omitted. For example: "Walk dog ... dog .. . park." \
     Comprehension is mostly intact, but some comprehension problems may exist (e.g., \
     understanding passive grammatical constructions). Other problems include \
     difficulty with word finding, naming objects, and repeating verbal phrases. People \
     with Broca's aphasia are aware of their difficulties. One way to remember this \
     aphasia is to think of it as "broken (Broca) or choppy speech." Broca's aphasia is \
     considered an expressive or motor aphasia. \
\
     WERNICKE'S APHASIA   Wernicke's aphasia results from lesions in the \
     dominant (left) temporal lobe. People with Wernicke's aphasia have no language \
     comprehension. They cannot follow verbal commands or repeat phrases. They \
     speak fluently, but what they're saying is complete nonsense (think of the phrase \
     "garbage in, garbage out"). Interestingly, they are unaware of their problem \
     (anosognosia) and expect others to be able to understand them. Wernicke's is \
     considered a receptive or sensory aphasia. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
     CONDUCTION APHASIA Conduction aphasia is relatively rare, and results \
     from a lesion to the connecting pathway between the expressive and receptive \
     speech areas. People with conduction aphasia have intact language comprehension. \
     speak fluently, but are unable to repeat verbal phrases. They resemble people with \
     Wernicke's aphasias in that they speak fluently but make no sense. However, unlike \
     people with Wernicke's aphasia, they are able to execute verbal commands because \
     they can still comprehend language. \
\
     GLOBAL APHASIA A global aphasia results from widespread damage to much \
     of the language regions of the cortex. Most language functions are impaired, \
     including fluency, comprehension, repetition, and naming. \
\
     ANOMIC APHASIA An anomic aphasia is characterized by problems recalling \
     words or names. The person may speak in a roundabout way (circumlocution) and \
     resort to descriptions to express a certain word for which they can't remember the \
     name. It is thought that anomia results from damage to the parietal or temporal lobe. \
\
     TRANSCORTICAL APHASIA   A transcortical aphasia is caused by damage \
     outside of the main language regions. There are three types of transcortical aphasias \
     - transcortical motor aphasia, transcortical sensory aphasia, and transcortical mixed \
     aphasia. They are similar to Broca's, Wernicke's, and global aphasia respectively, \
     except that the ability to repeat words, phrases, and sentences remains intact. For \
     example, in a transcortical motor aphasia, the person cannot spontaneously say "I \
     am thirsty." However, the person could repeat the phrase "I am thirsty" with ease. \
\
>APRAXIA Apraxia refers to the inability to carry out voluntary or purposeful motor \
movements, even though there are no motor or sensory deficits. The person understands \
and is willing to perform the movements; the person simply cannot execute the act. There \
are many different types of apraxias. Examples include difficulty carrying out a specific \
motor command voluntarily (e.g .. "scratch your nose") while being able to involuntarily \
perform this action with ease (e.g., scratching one's nose if it itches); inability to carry out \
a complex task in sequence (e.g., putting on one's socks before one's shoes); no longer \
being able to perform a learned task when given the necessary objects (e.g., when given a \
screwdriver, the person tries to write with it); difficulty planning and coordinating the \
movements necessary for speech (apraxia of speech); and difficulty drawing, copying, or \
constructing simple figures (constructional apraxia). It is believed that apraxia is caused by \
a lesion in the neural pathways of the brain that contain the learned patterns of movement; \
apraxia most likely results from damage to the parietal or frontal lobes. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
>AGNOSIA Agnosia is the loss of ability to recognize a specific sensory stimulus, such \
as objects, people, sounds, shapes, or smells. The specific sense is not defective nor is there \
any significant memory loss. Agnosia is caused by damage in the parietal, temporal or \
occipital regions. \
\
     PROSOPAGNOSIA Prosopagnosia refers to the inability to recognize a familiar \
     face. A person with prosopagnosia usually has both a retrograde problem (the \
     inability to recognize the faces of previously known individuals) and an anterograde \
     problem (the inability to learn new faces). Prosopagnosia occurs in spite of normal \
     or near-normal visual perception and intact alertness, attention, intelligence, and \
     language. It is thought to be due to injury to the areas of the visual association \
     cortex. \
\
     ANOSOGNOSIA Anosognosia is defined as the lack of awareness of a disability, \
     or the lack of awareness of the nature of one's illness. For example, people with \
     Wernicke's typically don't recognize that they are speaking gibberish or they \
     attribute their speech problem to some other cause, such as a long-standing learning \
     disorder. Anosognosia usually stems from deficits in the frontal or parietal lobes. \
\
>AGRAPHIA Agraphia refers to the partial or complete loss of ability to write. Patients \
may evidence problems with letter formation, spelling, word selection, grammar or spatial \
arrangement. Agraphia may result from left hemisphere damage in any of a variety of areas \
including the frontal, temporal or parietal lobes. \
\
>ALEXIA Alexia, also called word-blindness, refers to the loss of the ability to read \
and/or comprehend the meaning of written or printed words and sentences. The most \
common cause of alexia is a stroke to the dominant (left) hemisphere. \
\
>AMNESIA Amnesia refers to partial or total memory loss. \
\
     RETROGRADE AMNESIA    Retrograde amnesia involves the loss of pre- \
     existing memories. Retrograde amnesia is usually temporally graded, which means \
     that recent memories are much more affected in comparison with remote memories. \
     Typically, episodic memory (memory for autobiographical information) is more \
     severely affected than semantic memory (memory for factual information and \
     general knowledge of the world). The extent of retrograde amnesia can be relatively \
     short and encompass only one or two years, or it can be more extensive and cover \
     decades. Even in situations in which retrograde amnesia is extensive, memories for \
     the facts and events of childhood and adolescence are typically intact. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
     ANTEROGRADE AMNESIA Anterograde amnesia refers to the loss of ability \
     to form new memories. A person suffering from anterograde amnesia will forget \
     new information, new people, or new events within a few seconds because the \
     information does not transfer from short-term memory to long-term memory. \
\
>ONE-SIDED NEGLECT One-sided (hemispatial) neglect most often results from a \
stroke in the right hemisphere. Such individuals with right-sided brain damage often fail to \
be aware of objects to their left (the contralateral or opposite side of the brain damage). \
They may eat from only the right side of a plate, write only on the right side of a page, and \
shave or put make-up only on the non-neglected right (same side or ipsilateral) side of their \
face. Patients may forget to dress the left side of the body and walk into furniture or objects \
on the left. \
\
II. NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDERS \
\
Neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) include delirium, as well as major NCDs, mild NCDs. \
and their subtypes (e.g., due to Alzheimer's disease, due to traumatic brain injury). The \
term dementia is subsumed under major neurocognitive disorder. While dementia is still \
used for disorders involving degenerative processes typically in older adults (e.g., \
Alzheimer's), neurocognitive disorder is preferred for conditions affecting younger \
persons (e.g., impairment secondary to traumatic brain injury or HIV infection). The major \
NCD definition is also broad in that individuals with a decline in a single domain can \
receive the diagnosis (e.g., what used to be an amnestic disorder is now a major NCD). \
Less severe levels of cognitive impairment are diagnosed as a mild neurocognitive \
disorder. \
\
The criteria for the neurocognitive disorders include a decline in one or more of six \
cognitive domains: complex attention (sustained attention, divided attention, processing \
speed); executive function (planning, decision-making, responding to feedback, mental \
flexibility); learning and memory (immediate memory, recent memory, remote memory); \
expressive and receptive language (naming, word finding, grammar, comprehension); \
perceptual-motor (visual perception, visuo-constructional, perceptual-motor, praxis, \
gnosis); and social cognition (recognition of emotions, theory of mind). \
\
The distinction between mild and major NCD is based on the extent to which the cognitive \
symptoms interfere with daily functioning. If the "cognitive deficits interfere with \
independence in everyday activities," the diagnosis should be major cognitive disorder. If \
the deficits don't interfere with independence, the diagnosis should be mild cognitive \
\
\
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
disorder. Note that the distinction between major and mild cognitive disorder is not based \
on how many cognitive domains are affected nor on which domains are affected. \
\
Whether major or mild, the cause of a neurocognitive disorder (NCD) should always be \
specified as part of the diagnosis. Specifiers include whether due to: Alzheimer's disease, \
vascular disease, Lewy body disease, multiple etiologies, Parkinson's disease, \
Huntington's disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, HIV infection, prion disease \
(e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease), another medical condition, traumatic brain injury, \
substance/medication use, or unspecified. \
\
A. DELIRIUM \
\
The hallmark of delirium is a disturbance in attention and awareness (e.g., reduced \
orientation to the environment). The onset is rapid (hours to days) and the course tends to \
be fluctuating. Additionally, delirium includes a cognitive disturbance (e.g., memory \
problems, disorientation, language difficulties, visuospatial abilities, or perceptual \
disturbance). Delirium is only diagnosed when there is evidence that the symptoms have a \
physiological cause (i.e., a general medical condition, infection, substance intoxication, or \
substance withdrawal). Delirium is sometimes to referred to as an acute confusional state. \
\
In contrast with major or minor NCD, delirium has an acute onset and fluctuating course, \
and is usually reversible. Sometimes, delirium can be superimposed upon a major \
neurocognitive disorder (e.g., major NCD due to Alzheimer's disease, with delirium). \
\
Delirium may occur at any age, but it is most common with older adults. The most common \
causes of delirium are drugs/medications and infections. \
\
Once delirium is diagnosed or suspected, the underlying cause must be identified and \
targeted. Additionally, reorientation techniques or memory cues such as a calendar, a clock, \
and family photos may be helpful. The environment should be stable, quiet, and well lit. \
The most common medications used to manage delirium are antipsychotics (e.g., Haldol). \
Benzodiazepines often are used to manage withdrawal delirium. \
\
B. ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE (AD) \
\
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most commonly occurring major NCD, accounting for up \
to 80% of all cases of major NCD. Estimates are that between 5.2 and 5.4 million people \
in the U.S. (1 in 8 over the age of 65) have AD. The prevalence of AD increases with age; \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
less than 2% of people ages 65-69, 5% of those age 71-79, 24% of those age 80-89, and \
37% of those age 90 and over have AD. Alzheimer's disease is more prevalent in women, \
because on average women live longer than men. \
\
Early clinical symptoms of AD include memory problems (e.g., difficulty remembering \
names, recent events, what one was about to do, misplacing things), as well as apathy and \
depression. Later symptoms include disorientation, confusion, problems with judgment, \
behavior changes, and gait and motor problems. As the disease progresses, people need \
help with basic activities of daily living (e.g., bathing, dressing, eating). In the final stages \
of AD, patients lose their ability to communicate, fail to recognize loved ones, and become \
bedridden. \
\
Hallmark abnormalities of AD include amyloid plaques (deposits of protein fragment \
beta-amyloid) and neurofibrillary tangles (twisted strands of the protein tau). There is also \
evidence of neuronal damage and death throughout the cortex and within brain structures, \
especially the hippocampus (associated with memory) and amygdala (associated with \
aggression). Patients with AD evidence a significant decrease in the level of the neuro- \
transmitter acetylcholine (ACh), involved in learning and memory. \
\
In 2011, the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the Alzheimer's Association \
recommended new diagnostic criteria and guidelines for AD. Specifically, they identified \
three stages of Alzheimer's disease: 1) pre-clinical Alzheimer's disease (biomarkers \
indicate early disease, but no symptoms are present), 2) mild cognitive impairment or MCI \
due to Alzheimer's disease (mild but noticeable changes in thinking that do not affect the \
person's ability to carry out daily activities), and 3) dementia due to Alzheimer's disease. \
Alzheimer's is now thought to be a disease that begins up to 20 years before the \
development of symptoms. \
\
Until recently, diagnosis of AD could only be definitively made or confirmed based on \
histopathological evidence found on biopsy or autopsy. New research shows that an agent \
called Amyvid (florbetapir) can help diagnose Alzheimer's by sticking to beta amyloid \
clumps and emitting radioactivity, which can then be picked up by a PET scan. Proton MR \
spectroscopy is also being used to detect abnormalities in several brain metabolites that \
may be biomarkers of future Alzheimer's disease. \
\
Although the etiology of AD remains unclear, there is some evidence for a genetic \
component. Individuals with a first-degree relative with Alzheimer's are more likely to \
develop the disease than those who do not have a first-degree relative with Alzheimer's. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
Alzheimer's is a progressive disease. It is considered cortical in nature, with memory, \
language, and praxis most affected. Two principles of AD management are to support \
caregivers and treat what is treatable (without aggravating existing symptoms). The most \
common caregivers for Alzheimer's patients are their adult children. A variety of drugs, \
such as Aricept (donepezil) and Cognex (tacrine) appear to result in modest, albeit \
temporary improvements in cognitive functioning (e.g., 3 - 4 points on the Folstein Mini \
Mental State). Currently there is no treatment that slows or stops AD. Research is actively \
looking at developing "disease modifying" treatments. \
\
C. MAJOR VASCULAR NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER \
\
Major vascular NCD is the second most common major NCD, and accounts for 10-15% of \
all cases of major NCD in older adults. Major vascular NCD is twice as common in males \
as females. It results from numerous small cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs) or strokes. \
The location of the brain injury (microscopic bleeding and blood vessel blockage) \
determines how the person's functioning is affected. \
\
Initial symptoms of vascular NCD include impaired judgment or ability to make plans, as \
opposed to the memory loss more often associated with the beginnings of Alzheimer's. \
Onset is typically abrupt, with a course frequently described as "step-wise" to indicate that \
there are plateaus followed by further degeneration. \
\
Half of those diagnosed with major vascular NCD die within two to three years of \
diagnosis, and age of onset is usually younger than in Alzheimer's. Although no \
medications can reverse the effects of a stroke, aspirin, anticoagulants, and \
antihypertensives can reduce the likelihood of a future stroke. \
\
D. MAJOR NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER WITH LEWY \
BODIES \
\
Major NCD with Lewy bodies involves abnormal aggregations (clumps) of the protein \
alpha-synuclein (also found in Parkinson's Disease). Symptoms of major NCD with Lewy \
bodies are similar to Alzheimer's, but typically also include visual hallucinations, sleep \
disturbances, and muscle rigidity or other parkinsonian movement features (e.g., shuffling \
gait). \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
E. MAJOR NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER DUE TO \
MULTIPLE ETIOLOGIES \
\
Major NCD due to multiple etiologies most commonly involves Alzheimer's disease co- \
occurring with another NCD, such as vascular disease or Lewy bodies. Recent research \
suggests that major NCD due to multiple etiologies is more common than previously \
thought. \
\
F. PARKINSON'S DISEASE \
\
Parkinson's disease (PD) is primarily considered a movement disorder marked by tremor, \
rigidity, bradykinesia (slowed initiation of movement), and shuffling gait. Sufferers also \
frequently exhibit various neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as depression or a \
neurocognitive disorder. Estimates of the prevalence rates of depression in patients with \
PD vary considerably, from less than 25% to 75%. Some research suggests that symptoms \
of depression may precede the motor symptoms of PD by several years. As PD progresses, \
neurocognitive symptoms are quite common, with a prevalence rate of major NCD due to \
Parkinson's disease of up to 40% in PD patients. Major NCD due to Parkinson's disease is \
generally considered to be sub-cortical, affecting speed of processing and executive \
functions (planning, organizing, sequencing). \
\
The incidence of PD is about one-tenth that of Alzheimer's. Abnormalities found in PD \
include alpha-synuclein aggregates (also found in neurocognitive disorder with Lewy \
bodies) that begin in the substantia nigra, a section of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia \
are involved in regulating voluntary movement. The aggregates are thought to cause \
degeneration of the nerve cells that produce dopamine. L-Dopa (Levodopa), which is a \
precursor to dopamine, is used to treat the movement components of Parkinson's. \
Unfortunately, it does not alter the progression of the disease nor decrease symptoms of \
the major neurocognitive disorder. \
\
G. HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE (CHOREA) \
\
Huntington's disease is a fatal condition that results from an autosomal-dominant gene. \
Symptoms gradually become apparent between 30 and 50 years of age. Earliest symptoms \
are typically non-specific changes in personality and mood, such as irritability. apathy, or \
disinhibition. All patients with Huntington's disease experience a progressively \
deteriorating major NCD (memory loss and lack of reasoning) that slowly develops along \
with psychological symptoms. The choreiform movements (frequent, discrete, brisk \
\
\
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
jerking movements of the pelvis, trunk, and limbs), athetosis (slow writhing movements), \
as well as facial grimaces may begin up to 10 years after the onset of the disease. \
\
Huntington's disease involves the basal ganglia, specifically the caudate nucleus and \
putamen. The motor symptoms of the disease are thought to result from a significant \
reduction of acetylcholine and GABA, which in turn triggers an excess of dopamine. \
\
Genetic counseling is an important intervention for people with a family history of \
Huntington's. A child whose parent has the gene for Huntington's has a 50% chance of \
getting Huntington's. \
\
H. MAJOR FRONTOTEMPORAL NEUROCOGNITIVE \
DISORDER \
\
Major frontotemporal NCD (frontotemporal lobar degeneration) is an umbrella term used \
to describe a diverse group of rare disorders that primarily affect the frontal and temporal \
lobes of the brain. Typical symptoms include changes in personality and behavior (e.g., \
problems with judgment, explosive temper, disinhibition and poor impulse control, \
impaired insight) and difficulty with language. Pick's disease and progressive supranuclear \
palsy are both major frontotemporal NCDs. \
\
I. MAJOR NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER DUE TO HIV \
INFECTION \
\
In the U.S. more than one million people are living with HIV. HIV infects vital cells of the \
immune system. Prior to the advent of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), major \
NCD was a common source of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected patients. \
\
Major NCD due to HIV infection is also referred to as AIDS dementia complex (ADC). \
The symptoms of ADC include cognitive, motor, and behavioral/mood changes. The \
cognitive symptoms include memory problems (although long-term memory frequently \
remains intact), difficulty with attention and concentration, and language difficulties. \
Motor problems commonly include weakness, lack of coordination, unsteady gait, and \
jerky eye movements. Behavioral/mood changes include apathy, withdrawal, lack of \
motivation, personality changes, inappropriate affect, mood swings, and even \
hallucinations. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
J. CREUTZFELDT-JAKOB DISEASE \
\
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a rare, degenerative, fatal brain disorder, thought to \
result from an infectious misfolded protein (prion) that triggers other proteins throughout \
the brain to misfold and thus malfunction. CJD results in a rapidly progressive major NCD \
(due to prion diseae), with problems with muscular coordination, personality changes. \
impaired orientation, memory, judgment, and thinking, as well as problems with vision. \
The average duration of the disease from onset of symptoms to death is four to six months. \
A variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is believed to be caused by consumption of products \
from cattle affected by mad cow disease. \
\
K. HYDROCEPHALUS \
\
Hydrocephalus involves a pathological accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the \
brain's ventricles, causing increased intracranial pressure. Hydrocephalus can be caused \
by either over-production or malabsorption of CSF, with malabsorption being far more \
common. In addition to causing problems of urinary incontinence and unsteady gait, \
hydrocephalus can lead to a neurocognitive disorder. Hydrocephalus can sometimes be \
corrected, and symptoms reversed, with the surgical installation of a shunt in the brain to \
drain excess fluid. \
\
L. NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER DUE TO \
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY \
\
Neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury involves a NCD that results directly \
from the pathophysiological consequence of head trauma. The nature and extent of the \
cognitive impairment and other behavioral disturbances depends upon the location and \
extent of the brain injury. In many cases, posttraumatic amnesia is present, as well as some \
degree of persisting memory impairment and some disturbance of executive functioning. \
Other symptoms may include problems with attention, difficulty regulating mood (e.g .. \
irritability, anxiety, depression or affective lability), aggression, apathy, or other changes \
in personality. \
\
Head trauma is the leading cause of brain injury in children and young adults. Head traumas \
can stem from either closed-head or open-head injuries. \
\
>CLOSED-HEAD INJURIES In closed-head injuries, the skull is not pierced or cracked. \
A loss of consciousness frequently results. The two most common subtypes are \
concussions and contusions. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
     CONCUSSIONS Concussions, the most common head injury, result from a blow \
     to the head, hard enough to cause temporary neural dysfunction, but not hard \
     enough to cause a cerebral contusion (bruising). Concussions may cause a short- \
     term loss of consciousness as well as both anterograde amnesia (inability to \
     remember new information) and retrograde amnesia (loss of memory for \
     information acquired prior to the injury). With concussions, retrograde amnesia \
     typically includes amnesia for events just before the injury and the incident itself. \
     rather than for remote events. Brain injuries from concussions are microscopic, \
     widespread, and tend to cause functional (rather than structural) damage. \
\
     Postconcussion syndrome is a constellation of somatic and psychological \
     symptoms including headache, dizziness, fatigue, diminished concentration, \
     memory deficit, irritability, anxiety, insomnia, hypochondriacal concern, \
     hypersensitivity to noise, hypersensitivity to light (photophobia). The most \
     common symptoms are irritability, fatigue, headache, and dizziness. Generally, the \
     psychological symptoms heal in about the same period of time that the physical \
     injuries do. \
\
     CONTUSIONS Cerebral contusions (bruises) are more serious than concussions, \
     and result from a severe blow to the head that leads to bleeding and bruising of the \
     brain. The bruising typically occurs in a coup-countrecoup fashion, meaning that \
     there is bruising beneath the point of impact (coup) as well as on the opposite side \
     of the brain (countercoup). Cerebral swelling is also common and is potentially life- \
     threatening. Contusions are localized, macroscopic, and tend to cause structural \
     damage. The site of the coup or countercoup is frequently the frontal or temporal \
     lobes. Frontal lobe syndrome is characterized by a lack of foresight and concern, \
     problems with executive functioning, irresponsibility, and a loss of insight. \
     Temporal lobe syndrome is characterized by irritability and hostility. \
\
>OPEN-HEAD INJURIES   Open-head injuries (e.g., gunshot wounds) involve \
penetration of the skull. Many people who have open head injuries do not lose \
consciousness. Neurological signs are often highly specific, with the effects of the injuries \
resembling the surgical removal of a small area of the cortex. \
\
>RECOVERY FROM HEAD TRAUMA Although it is frequently stated that recovery \
from head trauma may continue for two to three years, the bulk of cognitive recovery \
occurs within the first six to nine months. Recovery of memory functions is typically \
slower than recovery of general intelligence. Additionally, the final level of memory \
performance is lower than for other cognitive functions. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 2 - Biological: Cognitive Disorders \
\
People with head trauma frequently suffer from retrograde amnesia, the inability to \
remember events that occurred prior to the trauma. As they recover their memory, they \
first remember more remote events and slowly remember events coming closer and closer \
to the event of the trauma. For example, the person first remembers what occurred ten years \
ago, then three years ago, then one year ago, then several months ago, etc. Frequently, \
memory is never regained for what happened just prior to the injury and for the traumatic \
incident itself. It is believed that the head injury disrupts the process of memory \
consolidation. \
\
M. SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED MAJOR \
NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER \
\
In a substance/medication-induced major NCD, the impairment persists beyond \
intoxication and withdrawal. Korsakoff's syndrome is a common cause of alcohol- \
induced major NCD, amnestic-confabulatory type. Korsakoff's results from chronic \
thiamin (Vitamin B1) deficiency associated with longstanding alcohol abuse. The most \
significant problem associated with Korsakoff's is anterograde amnesia, difficulty forming \
new memories. Korsakoff's patients also suffer from retrograde amnesia. While retrieval \
of recent memories is most impaired, Korsakoff patients also have difficulty retrieving \
more remote memories. Confabulation, the replacement of a gap in the patient's memory \
with false information the patient believes to be true, is common. Other hallmarks of \
Korsakoff's include lack of insight, limited spontaneous conversation, problems with \
executive functioning, disorientation, apathy, and labile irritability. \
\
N. PSEUDODEMENTIA \
\
Pseudodementia occurs in older people who are depressed and exhibit cognitive \
impairments resembling a neurocognitive disorder. Depressive symptoms in older people \
often include mild cognitive dysfunction: slower processing speed, difficulties in \
concentration and attention, psychomotor retardation, and easily giving up on difficult \
items when tested. A key distinguishing feature between people with pseudodementia and \
those with a NCD, is that patients with pseudodementia tend to complain about their \
memory loss while those with a NCD tend to lack insight into their condition and often \
deny memory loss. Additionally, people with pseudodementia regain mental function after \
the depression is treated, while those with a NCD do not. \
\
\
\
                                        Section 2 - Biological: Special Topics \
\
                2.5 SPECIAL TOPICS \
\
I. PAIN \
\
According to Melzak and Wall's (1965) gate control theory, sensations of pain are not \
directly related to activation of pain receptors, but rather they are mediated by neural gates \
in the spinal cord that allow these signals to continue on to the brain. Pressure stimulation \
tends to close the gates, which is why rubbing a hurt area may often relieve pain. \
Psychological factors, such as attitudes (cognitions) and moods, also significantly affect \
the gates. In particular, depression and bereavement may open neural gates and increase \
experiences of pain. \
\
Distinctions are commonly made between acute and chronic pain. Acute pain begins \
suddenly and is usually triggered by a clearly defined cause (e.g., an injury, surgery, burns \
or cuts, broken bones). Acute pain resolves with the healing of its underlying cause. \
Chronic pain persists despite the fact that the injury has healed. Chronic pain affects \
people both physically and emotionally. Physical effects may include tense muscles. \
limited mobility, and lack of energy. Emotional effects may include depression, anger, and \
anxiety. Common chronic pain complaints include headache, low back pain, cancer pain, \
arthritis pain, and neuropathic pain (shooting and burning pain, tingling and numbness, \
brought about by nerve damage). \
\
Chronic pain is a considered to be a multi-factorial process, largely affected by neural \
memories of previous pain. According to the centralization of pain theory, sensitization \
to pain occurs when the brain is exposed to repeated pain signals or nerve stimulation. As \
a result of neural plasticity (the brain's ability to change in response to one's experience), \
neurons develop a memory for responding to pain signals. Repeated or frequent stimulation \
results in a stronger brain memory; the brain responds more quickly when exposed to the \
same signals in the future, with a lowered pain threshold and a stronger pain response. \
Once central sensitization occurs, it also takes larger and larger doses of analgesics, \
typically opiates, to overcome it. Some practitioners argue that preemptive analgesia \
(treatment before pain progresses) may decrease or even prevent neural plasticity, and that \
pain should be treated early and aggressively. \
\
Historically, the recommendation for management of chronic pain has been to provide \
opiate pain medications on a time-contingent (e.g., on a fixed interval schedule) rather than \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Special Topics \
\
a pain-contingent (e.g., PRN or as needed) schedule. Time-contingent schedules reduce the \
likelihood of addiction to pain medications and provide better pain control. \
\
II. SLEEP \
\
There are two main types of sleep: Non-Rapid Eye Movement (NREM) Sleep and Rapid \
Eye Movement (REM) Sleep. Brain waves differ depending on a person's state of alertness, \
relaxation, and depth of sleep. Beta waves characterize states of alertness and attention. \
Alpha waves are present during relaxation. \
\
HINT: Beta waves mean you beta be alert. Alpha waves mean you're saying "aaah." \
\
The sleep cycle is divided into four NREM stages followed by REM sleep. REM sleep is \
sometimes referred to as Stage 5 sleep. \
\
     STAGE 1 Stage 1 is a brief transitional stage between wakefulness and sleep, the \
     lightest stage of sleep. In Stage 1 theta waves predominate. \
\
     STAGE 2 In Stage 2, the brain produces bursts of rapid, rhythmic brain wave \
     activity known as sleep spindles. Body temperature starts to decrease and heart rate \
     begins to slow. \
\
     STAGES 3 AND 4 Stages 3 and 4 are characterized by delta waves. Stage 3 is a \
     transitional period between light and very deep sleep, whereas Stage 4 is deep sleep. \
     Heart rate and respiration are slowed, but muscles maintain tone. \
\
     REM SLEEP REM sleep (Stage 5 sleep) is characterized by rapid eye movement, \
     increased respiration rate, and increased brain activity. REM sleep is also \
     considered paradoxical sleep; while the brain and other body systems become more \
     active, muscles become more relaxed. Most dreaming occurs during REM sleep. \
\
The stages of sleep alternate throughout the night. The deeper stages become less frequent \
in the second half of the night and REM sleep becomes more prominent. As people age the \
percentage of time spent in REM sleep decreases. For example, the time spent in REM \
sleep for newborns is 50%. For five-year-olds, it's about 20 - 25%, and for older adults, \
it's only 18%. \
\
\
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Special Topics \
\
If awakened during non-REM sleep, people report having a dream only 30% of the time. \
Non-REM dreams typically seem "normal" and logical. If awakened during REM sleep, \
most people report having a dream, which is typically bizarre and illogical. Overall, non- \
REM sleep appears to have a physically restorative function, whereas REM sleep appears \
to have a psychologically restorative function. \
\
Sleep deprivation has many negative effects. It significantly impairs memory. \
concentration, and decision-making; disrupts the body's metabolism; and increases stress \
hormones. Long-term sleep deprivation also increases the risk of automobile accidents. \
Dream deprivation (caused by waking subjects repeatedly during REM periods) results in \
REM-rebound. \
\
III. SEIZURES \
\
A seizure is a sudden disruption of the brain's normal electrical activity. Seizures are short \
lived (lasting from a few seconds to a few minutes) and stop on their own without medical \
help. Seizures always involve altered consciousness and/or other neurological and \
behavioral manifestations. Seizures are classified as either generalized or partial. \
\
>GENERALIZED SEIZURES Generalized seizures, by definition, affect the entire brain \
and always involve loss of consciousness. The two most common generalized seizures are \
tonic clonic seizures and absence seizures. \
\
   & TONIC CLONIC SEIZURES Tonic clonic seizures (also called grand mal \
     seizures) start with sudden loss of consciousness and tonic activity (stiffening) \
     followed by clonic activity (rhythmic jerking caused by alternating muscle \
     contractions and relaxation). After such seizures, people typically experience \
     headache, confusion, fatigue, and amnesia for the seizure. \
\
     ABSENCE SEIZURES Absence seizures (or petit mal seizures), occur most \
     frequently in children, usually beginning before the age of five. These seizures last \
     from one to 30 seconds and begin with a brief change in level of consciousness. \
     followed by blinking or rolling of the eyes, a blank stare, and slight mouth \
     movements, such as twitching. The person appears to be daydreaming. Posture is \
     retained and pre-seizure activity is returned to without difficulty. \
\
>PARTIAL SEIZURES Partial seizures involve an electrical disturbance that is limited \
to a specific area of one cerebral hemisphere. Partial seizures are classified into simple \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Special Topics \
\
partial seizures (in which consciousness or awareness is retained) and complex partial \
seizures (in which consciousness is impaired or lost). \
\
     SIMPLE PARTIAL SEIZURES In simple partial seizures there are electrical \
     abnormalities in a focal area of the brain only, which may include any of the lobes. \
     Symptoms may be motor (e.g., twitching), autonomic (e.g., racing heart), sensory \
     (e.g., abnormal smells), or psychological (e.g., fear, deja-vu). The person remains \
     conscious during the seizure and can later describe it in detail. Jacksonian \
     seizures, a type of simple partial frontal lobe seizure, are characterized by an \
     initially localized motor seizure, with a spread of abnormal activity to adjacent \
     brain areas. For example, the seizure may start with a finger and then slowly march \
     upwards to the whole hand and arm. \
\
     COMPLEX PARTIAL SEIZURES Complex partial seizures always involve \
     impairment of awareness/consciousness. Automatisms very commonly occur \
     during the seizure. Automatisms are involuntary, purposeless behaviors such as lip \
     smacking, repeating nonsense phrases, fidgeting, and aimless walking. Complex \
     partial seizures are frequently preceded by an aura, such as a familiar feeling (deja \
     vu), nausea, heat or tingling, or distortion of sensory perceptions. Complex partial \
     seizures are most commonly a manifestation of temporal lobe epilepsy. \
\
IV. ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY (ECT) \
\
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a procedure in which electric currents are passed \
through the brain, deliberately triggering a brief seizure that can immediately reverse \
symptoms of certain mental illnesses. In spite of the controversy that has historically \
surrounded ECT, it is now generally considered a safe and effective treatment. ECT is most \
widely used for certain patients with severe depression (especially with suicidality or \
psychotic symptoms). It is also used for patients with treatment-resistant bipolar disorder, \
acute psychosis, or catatonia. ECT has been found to help up to 85% of patients who are \
medication resistant. Additionally, ECT provides very rapid relief; many patients respond \
after the first or second treatment. \
\
Memory loss is one of the most significant concerns of ECT. Immediately following ECT. \
the person may be confused and disoriented for up to 45 minutes. In addition to the \
immediate effects of the procedure, patients commonly experience both anterograde and \
retrograde amnesia. Anterograde amnesia (difficulty creating new memories) typically \
resolves a few weeks after treatment. Retrograde amnesia tends to take longer to resolve. \
\
\
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Special Topics \
\
Most patients experience some permanent loss of memory for events that occurred during \
the treatment period and for events that occurred a few days to a few weeks beforehand. \
The risk of severe and long-lasting memory loss is uncommon. \
\
Bilateral ECT causes greater memory impairment than unilateral ECT. While some \
practitioners think unilateral ECT is less effective than bilateral ECT, others have argued \
that if the dose of electricity is adequate, unilateral ECT is as effective as bilateral ECT, \
with fewer adverse effects. \
\
V. TESTS OF BRAIN FUNCTION & STRUCTURE \
\
Tests of brain function and structure include the EEG, PET and SPECT scan, the MRI, \
fMRI, and MR spectroscopy, and the CT scan. \
\
>EEG (ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAM) An EEG uses electrodes attached to the scalp \
to measure electrical activity in the cortex. EEG results show changes in brain activity that \
aid in diagnosis of brain conditions, especially seizure disorders. An EEG is the preferred \
method of localizing the source of a seizure during the event. \
\
>PET AND SPECT SCANS Both the PET (positron emission tomography) scan and \
SPECT (single-photon emission computerized tomography) scan are nuclear imaging \
techniques, used to demonstrate activity or functioning of the brain and other organs. A \
small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein, inhaled, or swallowed. These \
scans measure metabolism and blood flow, which helps detect abnormalities. For example, \
cancers show up as brighter spots on PET/SPECT scans because cancer cells have a higher \
metabolism rate than normal cells. \
\
>MRI, IMRI, & MR SPECTROSCOPY MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) uses a \
magnetic field and radio waves to create detailed images of the structure of the brain, as \
well as other organs and tissues of the body. MRI is the most frequently used imaging test \
of the brain, and it can pick up scars or lesions indicating damage to specific regions. The \
fMRI (functional MRI) examines brain activity and functioning. In an fMRI, the MRI \
machine is specially configured to detect how the blood flows within the brain during a \
specific task. The parts of the brain that are involved or active during a task have more \
blood flow and show up as bright colors on the scan images. MR spectroscopy is used to \
detect metabolic changes in the brain that may be consistent with certain disease processes. \
\
>CT SCAN (COMPUTERIZED TOMOGRAPHY) The CT scan is a test of structure. \
It combines a series of X-ray views taken from many different angles and computer \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Special Topics \
\
processing to create cross-sectional images of the brain, bones, or soft tissues of the body. \
CT scans are especially useful for quickly examining people who may have bleeding, blood \
clots, or internal injuries from car accidents or other types of trauma. \
\
VI. HEADACHES \
\
Primary headaches include tension, migraine, and cluster headaches. They are considered \
primary in that they are not caused by an underlying structural problem in the head or neck \
(e.g., a tumor, bleeding in the brain, encephalitis). \
\
>TENSION HEADACHES Tension headaches are the most common type of headache. \
They are characterized by a feeling of band-like tightness, ache, or pressure around the \
head. The pain, which is bilateral, is typically dull and steady. The headache is not \
associated with an aura, nausea, vomiting, or sensitivity to light and sound. Most people \
can function normally, despite the headache. Tension headaches occur more commonly \
among women than men. \
\
>MIGRAINE HEADACHES Migraines are the second most common type of headache. \
They commonly involve unilateral (bilateral on occasion) throbbing pain, of moderate to \
severe intensity. The pain interferes with or is worsened by normal physical activity. \
Associated features include nausea and/or vomiting, and sensitivity to light and sound. \
About 15% - 20% of people experience an aura (e.g., visual distortion, hand numbness) \
prior to the headache. Ocular/retinal migraines involve visual disturbances such as flashing \
or bright lights, floating geometric shapes, scotomata (blind spots), or loss of peripheral \
vision. \
\
>CLUSTER HEADACHES Cluster headaches are recurring headaches that occur in \
groups or cycles over a period of days or weeks, followed by remissions that can last days \
or weeks. They appear suddenly and are characterized by severe, debilitating pain on one \
side of the head, often accompanied by a watery eye and nasal congestion or a runny nose \
on the same side of the face. Cluster headaches are rare, affecting 0.1% of the population \
(1 in 1,000 people). These headaches are more frequent in men. \
\
VII. SYNESTHESIA \
\
Synesthesia is a perceptual condition of mixed sensations. It occurs when a stimulus in one \
sensory modality (e.g., vision) involuntarily elicits a sensation/experience in another \
modality (e.g. olfaction); or a perception of a form (e.g., a letter or number) induces a \
\
\
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Special Topics \
\
different perception in the same modality (e.g. a color). It comes from the Greek roots syn \
(together) and aithesis (perception). Synesthesia runs in families and occurs in people who \
are neurologically normal. Current estimates are that 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 25,000 have \
synesthesia. Famous examples include the novelist Vladimir Nabokov and the artist David \
Hockney. \
\
VIII. GENERAL ADAPTATION SYNDROME (GAS) \
\
Hans Selye developed a model of response to long-term stress that he called the General \
Adaptation Syndrome (GAS). GAS consists of three stages: alarm, resistance, and \
exhaustion. \
\
>ALARM During the alarm stage, the body mobilizes resources to cope with stress ("fight \
or flight response") by activating the sympathetic nervous system and releasing stress \
hormones including cortisol and adrenaline. While the body is highly alert, this initial \
response can lower immune functioning and decrease resistance to illness. Physical \
symptoms may include headaches, fatigue, and diarrhea. \
\
>RESISTANCE In the resistance stage, the alarm reaction subsides and the body adapts \
to the stressor. The person may experience a level of resistance to illness above normal. \
\
>EXHAUSTION   During the exhaustion phase, which occurs in response to chronic, \
unremitting stress, the body's resources are exhausted and immunity is greatly lowered. \
Unless a way of reducing stress is found, there can be significant loss of health and in \
extreme cases even death. \
\
IX. HEALTH BELIEF MODEL \
\
Rosenstock's health belief model is multicausal, positing that in addition to psychosocial \
factors (e.g., demographic characteristics, peer pressure), there are six constructs that \
predict health behavior. These include perceived susceptibility to disease, perceived \
seriousness of the disease, perceived benefits of preventative action, perceived barriers to \
preventative action, cues to action (e.g., media information), and self-efficacy (confidence \
in one's ability to take action). This model has been widely applied to designing \
interventions to change habitual unhealthy behaviors, such as being sedentary, smoking, or \
overeating, and to encourage healthy habits such as exercise and good nutrition. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Antipsychotics \
\
          PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY \
\
What follows is a description of the major classes of psychotropic medications: the \
antipsychotics, antidepressants, antianxiety agents, mood stabilizers, and stimulants. \
\
Brand names are capitalized, and generic names are lower case and in parentheses. \
Asterisks mark those drugs that are most commonly prescribed and that you should \
definitely be able to recognize. \
\
               2.6 ANTIPSYCHOTICS \
\
First Generation, Conventional, Typical, or Traditional Antipsychotics \
\
Thorazine (chlorpromazine) ***    Orap (pimozide) \
Prolixin (fluphenazine) ***       Loxitane (loxapine) \
Haldol (haloperidol) ***          Moban (molindone) \
Trilafon (perphanazine) ***       Stelazine (trifluoperazine) \
Serentil (mesoridazine)           Mellaril (thioridazine) \
Navane (thiothixene) \
\
Second Generation, Atypical, or Novel Antipsychotics \
\
Clozaril (clozapine) ***          Seroquel (quetiapine) *** \
Risperdal (risperidone) ***       Geodon (ziprasidone) *** \
Zyprexa (olanzapine) ***          Abilify (ariprazole) *** \
Invega (paliperidone) *** \
\
 HINT: One way to identify a conventional/typical antipsychotic drug is to note that \
 many end with the suffix "azine." \
 NOTE: Antipsychotics are also called neuroleptics or major tranquilizers. \
\
\
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Antipsychotics \
\
I. OVERVIEW \
\
Schizophrenia is characterized by positive symptoms (e.g., hallucinations, delusions, \
disorganized thinking), negative symptoms (e.g., affective flattening, lack of motivation, \
poverty of speech, etc.), and cognitive symptoms (e.g., poor executive functioning, trouble \
focusing and paying attention, problems with working memory). These symptoms \
frequently limit functional capacity and reduce quality of life. \
\
The first-generation typical antipsychotic drugs, available since the mid-1950s, have a long \
history of effectiveness in reducing positive symptoms. However, they are only minimally \
effective for the negative and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia. Second generation \
atypical antipsychotics were introduced in the 1990s. Initially, these medications were \
viewed as a breakthrough in the treatment of negative symptoms. However, in practice, \
this has not been the case. Results of recent large-scale research studies indicate that \
atypical antipsychotics appear to be no more effective than typical antipsychotics, nor are \
they associated with better cognitive or social outcomes. The side effects of the atypical \
antipsychotics are generally less severe. \
\
II. PRESUMED MECHANISM OF ACTION \
\
All antipsychotics are to some extent dopamine D2 antagonists, which means that they \
lower ("antagonize") the levels of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain by blocking \
postsynaptic dopamine receptors. \
\
III. DISORDERS TREATED WITH ANTIPSYCHOTICS \
\
>SCHIZOPHRENIA Antipsychotics are the medication of choice for the treatment of \
schizophrenia. They are generally effective in reducing positive symptoms of \
schizophrenia. However, they do not appear to significantly affect the negative and \
cognitive symptoms of the disorder. \
\
>OTHER PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS   Antipsychotics are commonly used to treat \
psychotic disorders other than schizophrenia, including delusional disorder, brief psychotic \
disorder, and schizoaffective disorder. \
\
>BIPOLAR DISORDER Atypical antipsychotics medications are sometimes used in \
conjunction with mood stabilizers or antidepressants to treat manic episodes of bipolar \
disorder. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Antipsychotics \
\
>OTHER CLINICAL USES   Antipsychotics are also used to manage delirium, \
Tourette's disorder, and autism spectrum disorder (to decrease oppositional behavior. \
emotional lability, and irritability). They are also sometimes used as an adjunct in the \
treatment of PTSD and major depressive disorder. While antipsychotics have been used in \
the treatment of neurocognitive disorders, the FDA has determined that death rates are \
higher for elderly patients with neurocognitive disorders when taking antipsychotics. \
\
IV. SIDE EFFECTS \
\
The antipsychotics differ somewhat in their side effect profiles. Common side effects when \
starting any antipsychotic medication include sedation and drowsiness, as well as \
orthostatic hypotension (dizziness when standing up). Both the typical and atypical \
antipsychotics may cause anticholinergic side effects. Weight gain and sexual dysfunction \
may also occur. For the typical antipsychotics (especially Haldol, Prolixin, and Trilafon, \
which are higher potency), the most significant side effects are the extrapyramidal \
symptoms (EPS). All of the antipsychotics can potentially cause tardive dyskinesia, \
although the risk is reduced with atypical antipsychotics. In contrast, the atypical \
antipsychotics carry a higher risk of metabolic adverse effects. The atypical antipsychotic \
Clozaril (clozapine) is associated with an increased risk of agranulocytosis. \
\
>ANTICHOLINERGIC EFFECTS Anticholinergic effects include dry mouth (the most \
common anticholinergic effect), constipation, urinary hesitancy or retention, blurred \
vision, dry eyes, photophobia (sensitivity to light), nasal congestion, confusion, and \
decreased memory. These side effects typically diminish but do not completely disappear \
within the first month of antipsychotic use. These symptoms can be remembered because \
they mostly deal with "drying out" or "holding in." \
\
>EXTRAPYRAMIDAL SYMPTOMS (EPS)   Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) are \
movement-related symptoms, some of which are the most disturbing and damaging side \
effects of the antipsychotics. EPS symptoms may be managed through the use of \
anticholinergic agents (ACAs), such as Cogentin (benztropine) and Artane (trihexy- \
phenidyl). A significant advantage of the atypical antipsychotics is that they are far less \
likely to cause EPS. \
\
EPS symptoms include dystonia (acute and painful muscle spasms), parkinsonism (a \
mask-like face, shuffling gait, drooling, resting tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia), and \
akathisia (an unpleasant, restless feeling particularly in the legs). Akathisia is both \
extremely common and distressing, and is associated with premature treatment \
termination. \
\
\
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Antipsychotics \
\
>TARDIVE DYSKINESIA (TD) Tardive dyskinesia (TD) most commonly involves \
abnormal movements of the lips, tongue, and jaw (e.g., lip smacking, grimacing, chewing, \
rolling and protruding the tongue), and may involve the trunk or arms as well. TD generally \
occurs after a relatively long period of treatment (e.g., a year or more). There is a \
significantly higher risk of developing TD when taking typical antipsychotics; 20% to 40% \
of patients treated with typical antipsychotics eventually develop TD. While TD is not \
dangerous, it may be stigmatizing; people with TD are often considered weird. \
\
Tardive dyskinesia is best treated through prevention, such as monitoring patients regularly \
for tardive-like symptoms and re-assessing patients every six months to see if medications \
can be discontinued, or dosages reduced. Occasionally, the symptoms only emerge after \
medications have been terminated or dosages have been lowered. There is no established \
treatment for TD. Paradoxically, antipsychotics themselves represent a short-term \
treatment for TD. In two-thirds of all patients, an increase in antipsychotics resulted in a \
clinically significant, albeit temporary, reduction in TD symptoms. Anticholinergic agents \
usually exacerbate tardive dyskinesia. \
\
Tardive dyskinesia may be reversible. About 50% of the patients who develop tardive \
dyskinesia experience a full remission of symptoms after antipsychotics have been stopped. \
\
>METABOLIC EFFECTS Atypical antipsychotics frequently cause major weight gain \
and changes in metabolism. This increases the risk and prevalence of diabetes and high \
cholesterol. Weight, glucose levels, and lipid levels should all be regularly monitored in \
patients taking atypical antipsychotics. \
\
>NEUROLEPTIC MALIGNANT SYNDROME (NMS) NMS is rare. It affects less \
than 1% of patients treated with antipsychotics and is potentially lethal. It involves severe \
muscle rigidity, altered consciousness, autonomic instability (e.g., heart rate and blood \
pressure changes), and high fever, and requires emergency medical attention. \
\
>AGRANULOCYTOSIS Agranulocytosis is a potentially lethal side effect associated \
with Clozaril (clozapine). For this reason Clozaril is usually only administered to patients \
who have "failed" on trials of other antipsychotics. Agranulocytosis is a sudden drop in the \
white blood cell (granulocyte) count that results in a very high risk of serious infection due \
to immune suppression. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Antipsychotics \
\
V. DEPENDENCE/WITHDRAWAL/OVERDOSE \
\
Antipsychotics do not cause addiction, dependence, or tolerance. Withdrawal is only \
caused when a high dose is suddenly stopped. Symptoms might include gastrointestinal \
distress, headaches, insomnia, and nightmares. Overdoses are generally not highly lethal \
except if a full 30-60-day supply is taken at one time. They are also more lethal when \
combined with another drug, such as a tricyclic antidepressant. \
\
\
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Antidepressants \
\
              2.7 ANTIDEPRESSANTS \
\
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) & \
Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRIs) \
\
Prozac, Serafem (fluoxetine) *** Lexapro (escitalopam) *** \
Zoloft (sertraline) ***           Luvox (fluvoxamine) \
Paxil (paroxetine) ***            Celexa (citalopram) \
Effexor (venlafaxine) *** [SNRI] Cymbalta (duloxetine) [SNRI] \
\
Tricyclics (TCAs) \
\
Elavil (amitryptyline) ***        Vivactil (protriptyline) \
Anafranil (clomipramine) ***     Surmontil (trimipramine) \
Tofranil (imipramine) ***         Norpramin (desipramine) \
Sinequan (doxepin) ***            Pamelor, Aventyl (nortriptyline) \
Asendin (amoxapine) \
\
Monoamine-Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs) \
\
Nardil (phenelzine)               Parnate (tranylcypromine) \
Marplan (isocarboxazid)           Ensam (selegiline) patch \
\
Other Antidepressants \
\
Wellbutrin (bupropion) ***        Ludiomil (maprotiline) \
Desyrel (trazadone) ***           Remeron (mirtazipine) \
\
 HINT: Tricyclies can sometimes be recognized by the ending "amine" or "tyline." \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 2 - Biological: Antidepressants \
\
I. OVERVIEW \
\
The SSRIs are the newest and most widely prescribed antidepressants. The SSRIs are \
generally well tolerated, with few side effects and minimal lethality. The tricyclics are \
highly effective. However, their potential side effects are more serious and they can be fatal \
when taken in overdose. The MAOIs are the oldest class of antidepressants. MAOIs are \
especially effective in treating atypical depression (increased appetite and need for sleep). \
However, MAOIs interact dangerously with certain foods and medications. \
\
II. PRESUMED MECHANISM OF ACTION \
\
The primary mechanism of action of most antidepressants is to block reuptake of serotonin \
and/or norepinephrine, thus increasing the levels of those neurotransmitters in the brain. \
As their name implies, the SSRIs have a selective impact on serotonin. Wellbutrin \
(bupropion) is an anomaly, as its effect is to increase dopamine. It typically takes a couple \
of weeks for antidepressant medications to take effect. \
\
III. DISORDERS TREATED \
\
>MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER All of the antidepressants have been found to be \
equally effective in treating typical depressions. Patients taking SSRIs usually experience \
fewer and less distressing side effects than with other classes of antidepressants. SSRIs are \
also safer. For this reason, they are now generally considered the first line of treatment for \
depression. \
\
>BIPOLAR DISORDER, DEPRESSED When antidepressants are used to treat \
symptoms of depression in patients with bipolar disorder, typically a mood stabilizer is \
prescribed concomitantly. This is done to minimize the risk of inducing a manic episode. \
Prozac, Paxil, Zoloft, and Wellbutrin are commonly used to treat bipolar depression. \
\
>ANXIETY DISORDERS, TRAUMA-RELATED DISORDERS, OBSESSIVE- \
COMPULSIVE DISORDERS   Antidepressants are widely used in the treatment of \
anxiety disorders, trauma-related disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorders. They are \
a safe and effective alternative to antianxiety medications (e.g., benzodiazepines), and do \
not lead to abuse or dependence. \
\
     PANIC DISORDER In addition to using antianxiety agents Xanax (alprazolam) \
     and Ativan (lorazepam), panic disorder is frequently treated with antidepressants, \
\
\
\
                                      Section 2 - Biological: Antidepressants \
\
     including the SSRIS (Prozac, Zoloft, Lexapro, Paxil, Celexa), the TCA Tofranil \
     (imipramine), and the MAOIs. \
\
     OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER   Obsessive-compulsive disorder \
     often responds to the TCA Anafranil (clomipramine) and appears to respond to all \
     the SSRIS. \
\
     PTSD The SSRIs are commonly prescribed in the treatment of PTSD. \
\
     SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER The SSRIs are commonly prescribed in the \
     treatment of social anxiety disorder. \
\
     GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER The SNRI Effexor (venlafaxine) and \
     the TCA Tofranil (imipramine) are used to treat generalized anxiety disorder. \
\
>CHRONIC PAIN DISORDERS Chronic pain problems have been shown to respond \
especially well to many of the TCAs, including Elavil (amitryptiline), Norpramin \
(desipramine), Sinequan (doxepin), Tofranil (imipramine), Anafranil (clomipramine), and \
Pamelor (Nortriptyline). \
\
>BULIMIA NERVOSA Antidepressants are commonly used in the pharmacological \
treatment of bulimia nervosa; the only medication that is FDA approved is Prozac \
(fluoxetine). Several studies have demonstrated efficacy of other SSRIs (Zoloft, Paxil, \
Celexa), as well as of the TCAs (Tofranil, Pamelor, Norpramine), and the MAOIs \
(Parnate). \
\
>PREMATURE   (EARLY) EJACULATION    Both the tricyclic Anafranil \
(clomipramine) and the SSRIs are effective for the treatment of premature (early) \
ejaculation. \
\
>OTHER CLINICAL USES Antidepressants are also used for severe bereavement. \
anorexia nervosa, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, enuresis, childhood sleepwalking or \
night terrors, persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), and borderline personality \
disorder. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Antidepressants \
\
IV. SIDE EFFECTS \
\
>SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS (SSRIs) The SSRIs have the \
advantage of having far fewer side effects than the TCAs and MAOIs. Side effects may \
include headaches, nervousness, restlessness, insomnia, and gastrointestinal distress, \
which tend to fade over time. When sexual dysfunction occurs, it may be helped by \
adjusting the dose or switching to another medication. SSRIs carry a black box warning of \
potential risk of suicidal thinking or attempts for children and adolescents. \
\
>TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS (TCAS)   The TCAs may cause severe \
anticholinergic effects (e.g., dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, urinary hesitation, \
confusion, memory problems). Other frequent side effects are sedation, orthostatic \
hypotension, weight gain, nausea, and sexual dysfunction. TCAs are also linked to \
increased risk of heart disease and are contraindicated in patients with heart conditions, \
high blood pressure, or seizures. \
\
>MONOAMINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS (MAOIs) The MAOIs frequently cause \
orthostatic hypotension, weight gain, edema, sexual dysfunction, and insomnia. The most \
serious side effect is a tyramine-induced hypertensive crisis. Patients who take MAOIs \
must not eat foods high in tyramine because these foods can trigger a dangerous increase \
in blood pressure requiring immediate medical attention. Symptoms of a tyramine-induced \
hypertensive crisis include severe headache, stiff neck, palpitations, sweating, nausea, and \
vomiting. Tyramine-rich foods that need to be avoided include red wine, fava beans, aged \
cheese, liver, orange pulp, pickled or smoked fish or meats, packaged soups, yeast vitamin \
supplements, meat extracts, and dry sausage. Foods that may be consumed only in \
moderation include soy sauce, sour cream, bananas, avocados, eggplants, plums, raisins, \
spinach, tomatoes, and yogurt. Certain medications should also be avoided while taking an \
MAOI. For example, MAOIs can react with SSRIs and cause serotonin syndrome, with \
is potentially life threatening. This dangerous side effect profile in combination with the \
requirement for strict dietary and medication compliance are key reasons that MAOIs are \
much less commonly prescribed than other antidepressants. \
\
V. DEPENDENCE/WITHDRAWAL/OVERDOSE \
\
Antidepressants do not cause dependence, tolerance, or addiction. Abruptly stopping \
antidepressants can precipitate withdrawal symptoms that are not life-threatening. Both \
TCAs and MAOIs are highly lethal when patients attempt suicide by medication overdose. \
Lethality further increases if combined with alcohol. In contrast, the SSRIs and the other \
antidepressants (e.g., Wellbutrin, Remeron) are not very lethal. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 2 - Biological: Benzodiazepines \
\
              2.8 BENZODIAZEPINES \
          (AND OTHER ANTIANXIETY/ \
                  SLEEP AGENTS) \
\
Anxiolytics (BZs) \
\
Xanax (alprazolam) ***           Librium (chlordiazepoxide) \
Klonopin (clonazepam) ***         Tranxene (clorazepate) \
Valium (diazepam) ***            Paxipam (halazepam) \
Ativan (lorazepam) ***           Serax (oxazepam) \
\
Sedative/Hypnotics (BZs) \
\
Restoril (temazepam) ***         Halcion (triazolam) *** \
\
Non-Benzodiazepine Anxiolytics \
\
Buspar (buspirone) *** \
\
Non-Benzodiazepine Sedative/Hypnotics \
\
Ambien (zolpidem) ***             Lunesta (eszopiclone) \
Sonata (zaleplon) \
\
 HINT: You can easily identify a drug as a benzodiazepine because almost all the \
 generic names end in "pam" or "lam." \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Benzodiazepines \
\
 I. OVERVIEW \
\
 The benzodiazepines (BZs) are divided into two broad categories; they are considered \
 anxiolytics when their major function is anxiety reduction, and sedative/hypnotics when \
 their predominant purpose is to induce sedation and improve sleep. \
\
 Non-benzodiazepine anxiolytics and sedative/hypnotics medications are also available. \
 Buspar (buspirone) is a non-benzodiazepine anxiolytic. It has a low potential for abuse and \
 dependence, and does not cause sedation, cognitive impairment, or withdrawal. However, \
 unlike the BZs whose effects are felt immediately, Buspar (buspirone) typically requires \
two to four weeks for a clinical response and cannot be taken as needed (prn). \
\
 Beta-blockers are usually used to treat high blood pressure and other heart conditions. \
 Inderal (propranolol), a beta-blocker, can prevent the physical symptoms of anxiety that \
 occur with social phobia. \
\
 II. PRESUMED MECHANISM OF ACTION \
\
 Benzodiazepines facilitate GABA's ability to bind to its receptor site, enhancing the effects \
 of GABA. GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, and increasing \
 GABA results in reduced anxiety, increased sedation, muscle relaxation, and reduction in \
 seizures. \
\
 III. DISORDERS TREATED \
\
>ANXIETY DISORDERS Although benzodiazepines are effective in treating anxiety, \
 because of their high potential for abuse and dependence, they should generally be \
 prescribed for short periods of time. When patients complain of anxiety, it is important to \
 first consider possible underlying causes of their symptoms. Medical illness (e.g., \
 hyperthyroidism, stroke, myocardial infarction, asthma, peptic ulcer disease), illicit drugs \
 (e.g., cocaine, amphetamine), or withdrawal from CNS depressants (e.g., benzodiazepines, \
 alcohol), may trigger anxiety. \
\
     PANIC DISORDER Xanax (alprazolam) and Ativan (lorazepam) are helpful for \
     panic disorder. The SSRIs or tricyclic antidepressants are usually the drug of choice \
     for treating panic disorder on a longer-term basis. \
\
 \
\
                                       Section 2 - Biological: Benzodiazepines \
\
      GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER (GAD) Xanax (alprazolam) and \
     Klonopin (clonazepam) are useful in the treatment of GAD. Buspar (buspirone) and \
     antidepressants are often used to treat GAD. \
\
      OTHER ANXIETY DISORDERS BZs may have a minor role in the treatment \
     of social anxiety disorder, specific phobia, posttraumatic stress disorder, and \
     obsessive-compulsive disorder. Antidepressants are much more commonly \
     prescribed. \
\
 >SLEEP PROBLEMS BZs are best used for short-term (e.g., less than seven days) sleep \
 problems precipitated by acute stress or jet lag. In addition to problems with tolerance and \
 dependence, a significant problem with using a BZ as a hypnotic is rebound insomnia; \
 discontinuing the use of a BZ in itself causes insomnia. Benzodiazepines also disrupt the \
 normal sleep cycle and suppress REM sleep. Once the BZs are discontinued, REM rebound \
 can cause vivid, disturbing dreams that also interfere with sleep. \
\
 >OTHER CLINICAL USES Klonopin (clonazepam) is sometimes used to treat acute \
 mania. The BZs are sometimes used to treat akathisia and alcohol withdrawal. They also \
 play a role as anticonvulsants (particularly Klonopin), muscle relaxants, and as adjuncts in \
 anesthesia (e.g., for a surgical procedure). \
\
 IV. SIDE EFFECTS \
\
 The most common side effects of the BZs are drowsiness and dizziness. Other side effects \
 may include mild cognitive impairment, impaired coordination, nightmares, headache, \
 upset stomach, and memory problems. \
\
 Possible side effects associated with Buspar include dizziness, headache, nausea, \
 lightheadedness, excitement, and insomnia. \
\
 Although beta-blockers are generally well tolerated, they can cause a variety of side effects. \
 They can cause sexual dysfunction, with up to 10% of male patients developing impotence \
 on certain beta-blockers. They can also cause fatigue, dizziness, shortness of breath, \
 angina, cold hands and feet, difficulty sleeping, and nightmares. \
\
 \
 \
\
                                      Section 2 - Biological: Benzodiazepines \
\
V. DEPENDENCE/TOLERANCE/WITHDRAWAL/ \
OVERDOSE \
\
Patients on benzodiazepines can develop both physiological and psychological \
dependence. Benzodiazepines vary greatly in how quickly they take effect and in how long \
they last (half-life). The most addictive BZs are those with rapid onset (providing a buzz) \
and a short half-life (such that the patient may experience a mini-withdrawal), such as \
Xanax. Taking the drug as needed (prn) also encourages dependency. \
\
Patients can definitely develop tolerance for benzodiazepines, requiring larger doses to \
have a similar effect. BZs and alcohol are "cross-tolerant;" meaning that people who \
develop a tolerance for benzodiazepines also experience an increased tolerance for alcohol. \
BZs can be used to reduce the symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. \
\
The withdrawal syndrome from the BZs is very serious and can be fatal. Patients should \
never abruptly stop using the BZs but should only gradually taper their use under a doctor's \
direction. Stage one symptoms include tremors, sweating, agitation, and increased \
autonomic reactions. Stage two includes hallucinations and panic. Stage three includes \
single or multiple grand mal seizures. \
\
BZs are rarely fatal when taken alone. However, when taken with alcohol or other CNS \
depressants they can easily be fatal. \
\
 PRECAUTIONS BZs should generally be avoided or only used with extreme caution \
 with older adults. BZ use in older adults is associated with increased risk of falls and \
 fractures, motor vehicle accidents, and cognitive impairment. BZ use should also be \
 limited in patients with a history of alcohol or drug dependence. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 2 - Biological: Mood Stabilizers \
\
             2.9 MOOD STABILIZERS \
     (LITHIUM AND ANTICONVULSANTS) \
\
Lithium \
\
Eskalith (lithium carbonate) \
Lithobid (lithium citrate) \
\
Anticonvulsants \
\
Tegretol (carbamazepine) ***     Lamictal (lamotrigine) *** \
Neurontin (gabapentin) ***        Trileptal (oxcarbazepine) \
Depakote (divalproex) ***        Topamax (topiramate) \
Depakene (valproic acid) *** \
\
I. OVERVIEW \
\
Lithium was the first mood-stabilizing medication, approved in the 1970s for the treatment \
of mania. Since the mid 1990s, anticonvulsants have also been used as mood stabilizers. \
While anticonvulsants were developed to treat seizures, they have been found to help \
stabilize mood as well. \
\
II. PRESUMED MECHANISM        OF ACTION \
\
The specific mechanism of action of Lithium and the anticonvulsants in stabilizing mood \
is largely unknown. \
\
III. DISORDERS TREATED \
\
>BIPOLAR DISORDER Lithium is the medication that is most often used to treat \
bipolar disorder. It generally takes a long time to take effect (from 1-3 weeks for mania \
and up to 6-8 weeks for depression). For this reason, lithium may be combined with an \
atypical antipsychotic to treat manic episodes, and with an antidepressant to treat \
depressive episodes. After several months, the drug has a prophylactic (preventive) effect. \
cutting in half the total number of mood episodes and decreasing their severity. It is also \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 2 - Biological: Mood Stabilizers \
\
used to treat schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type. Anticonvulsants are also used in the \
treatment of bipolar disorder, generally when lithium either does not work or is otherwise \
contraindicated. \
\
>OTHER CLINICAL USES In the treatment of depression, when antidepressants alone \
are ineffective, either lithium or an anticonvulsant may be added. Lithium is sometimes \
combined with antipsychotics to treat schizophrenia. Impulse control disorders (e.g., \
intermittent explosive disorder), are often well controlled by lithium or an anticonvulsant. \
Lithium is occasionally used as part of the treatment of cyclothymic disorder and borderline \
personality disorder. Anticonvulsants are also used for pain relief for certain neurological \
chronic pain disorders, such as trigeminal neuralgia. \
\
IV. SIDE EFFECTS AND OVERDOSE \
\
Side effects of lithium may include fine hand tremors, gastric distress (e.g., nausea, \
diarrhea, bloating), weight gain, sedation, hair loss, acne, polyuria, and polydipsia. Periodic \
blood tests are required for patients taking lithium to establish that levels are in a \
therapeutic range, and to monitor for thyroid or kidney problems. The most severe side \
effect is lithium toxicity, which is potentially fatal and is always a medical emergency. \
Symptoms may initially mimic the flu and include vomiting, abdominal pain, and severe \
diarrhea. Other signs of lithium toxicity include severe tremor, ataxia, coma, seizures, \
confusion, and irregular heartbeat. Lithium toxicity can occur when a patient is on a stable \
dose and is complying precisely with doctor's orders; it can also occur as the result of an \
overdose. \
\
Side effects of the anticonvulsants may include drowsiness, dizziness, headache, diarrhea, \
nausea, and vomiting. Anticonvulsants may also increase risk of suicidal thoughts and \
behaviors. \
\
V. DEPENDENCE/TOLERANCE/WITHDRAWAL \
\
Lithium does not cause tolerance, addiction, dependence, or withdrawal. Because of its \
side effects and because of the nature of bipolar disorder, non-compliance is a major \
problem in the use of lithium. Contraindications for its use include pre-existing heart \
disease, thyroid disease, renal damage, and pregnancy. Because of its effects on a host of \
body systems and many negative drug interactions, patients on lithium always require close \
medical supervision. The anticonvulsants do not cause dependence, tolerance or \
withdrawal. \
\
\
\
                                         Section 2 - Biological: Stimulants \
\
                 2.10 STIMULANTS \
\
Ritalin (methylphenidate) ***    Concerta (methylphenidate) *** \
Adderall (amphetamine) ***       Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine) *** \
\
 NOTE: Strattera (atomoxetine) *** is a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, \
 nonstimulant medication that is FDA approved for use in the treatment of ADHD. \
 Strattera comes with a warning that children and teenagers taking the medication have \
 an increased rate of suicidal thoughts. \
\
I. MECHANISM OF ACTION \
\
Stimulants work by both increasing the release of dopamine and norepinephrine (the \
catecholamines) and by blocking their reuptake. As a result, there is an overall increase in \
levels of dopamine and norepinephrine. \
\
II. DISORDERS TREATED WITH STIMULANTS \
\
>ADHD Stimulants are used primarily to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. \
Response typically occurs within the first two days of administration. \
\
>OTHER CLINICAL USES Stimulants are sometimes used for treatment-resistant \
depression, treatment-resistant obesity, narcolepsy, and chronic medically debilitating \
conditions (e.g., AIDS, Cancer). \
\
III. SIDE EFFECTS \
\
Stimulants may cause loss of appetite, insomnia, headaches, and gastrointestinal distress \
(stomach aches or nausea). They may also temporarily suppress growth in children. Other \
side effects include anxiety, irritability, and dysphoria, as well as increases in heart rate \
and blood pressure. Stimulants can occasionally bring about movement disorders (tics). \
\
\
 \
\
                                         Section 2 - Biological: Stimulants \
\
Taking drug holidays (structured treatment interruptions) have advantages and \
disadvantages. Benefits may include relief from some of the medication side effects (e.g., \
appetite suppression, irritability); nevertheless, disrupting the prescribed treatment plan \
may have a negative impact on social development and peer relations. \
\
IV. TOLERANCE/DEPENDENCE/WITHDRAWAL/ \
OVERDOSE \
\
The stimulants can definitely cause psychological dependence and drug abuse. They have \
"street value" as uppers. They can also cause physical dependence, tolerance (especially \
when used for narcolepsy), addiction, and withdrawal. Withdrawal symptoms include \
increased appetite, weight gain, increased sleep, decreased energy, and uncommonly, \
paranoid symptoms. Overdose is rarely lethal because of a large discrepancy between \
therapeutic dosages and lethal ones. \
\
\
\
ETHICAL AND                 PROFESSIONAL \
\
                      ISSUES \
\
                       SECTION 3 \
\
                     PsychPrep \
                     PASS EFFICIENTLY \
 \
\
          SECTION 3: ETHICAL AND \
            PROFESSIONAL ISSUES \
\
               THE ETHICS CODE \
\
The Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct of the American \
Psychological Association was officially adopted on August 21, 2002 and became effective \
June 1, 2003. Amendments to Standards 1.02 and 1.03 became effective on June 1, 2010, \
and the amendment to Standard 3.04 became effective January 1, 2017. \
\
This section summarizes the Ethics Code. Elaborations of the code are in italics. \
\
  3.1 INTRODUCTION AND APPLICABILITY \
\
The Ethics Code consists of an Introduction, Preamble, five General Principles, and ten \
Ethical Standards. The General Principles are aspirational, meaning that they are goals \
intended to "guide psychologists toward the highest ideals of psychology." It is explicitly \
stated that they are not enforceable rules. In contrast, the ten Ethical Standards are \
enforceable: they provide the specific guidelines for the ethical behavior of psychologists. \
\
The Ethics Code applies only to the professional and scientific activities of psychologists, \
and not to their private conduct. The Ethics Code explicitly states that professional \
activities include those delivered in person as well as by mail, telephone, internet, and other \
electronic means. \
\
Members and student affiliates of APA are obligated to comply with the Ethics Code. In \
the event of an ethics complaint, ignorance or misunderstanding of an Ethical Standard is \
not considered to be an adequate defense. Psychologists who violate the Ethics Code may \
be sanctioned by APA, including having their membership terminated. The APA may also \
notify other bodies, such as state licensing boards, of these sanctions. Sanctions against an \
APA member may also occur if the member is convicted of a felony, expelled, or \
suspended from a state association, or has his or her license revoked. Even those \
psychologists who are not members of APA may receive sanctions from other bodies that \
\
\
\
                                          Section 3 - Ethics: Introduction \
\
have adopted the Ethics Code, including licensing boards, state psychological associations, \
other professional groups, government agencies, and insurance companies. \
\
The introduction explicitly states that the Ethics Code is not intended to be a basis for civil \
liability: "Whether a psychologist has violated the Ethics Code standards does not by itself \
determine whether the psychologist is legally liable in a court action, whether a contract is \
enforceable, or whether other legal consequences occur." \
\
Civil liability is the issue in malpractice. A malpractice lawsuit can be thought of as based \
on the four D's: dereliction of duty directly causing damages. All four of these conditions \
must be met to hold a therapist liable. Dereliction means that the therapist failed to provide \
care that is reasonable (i.e., negligence). Duty means that the therapist had a legal \
relationship with the patient that gave rise to a duty (e.g., we have no duty to people we \
meet at a party). Dereliction of duty is also called breach of duty. Directly causing \
damages means, as it sounds, that the negligence of the therapist was the cause of some \
sort of harm to the patient. Thus, to prevail in a malpractice lawsuit, a patient must prove \
that the therapist was negligent (dereliction of duty), and that this negligence caused harm \
to the patient (directly causing damages). \
\
Vicarious liability refers to a situation in which someone is held legally liable for either \
the actions or omissions of another person. Thus, a supervisor may potentially be held \
responsible for a supervisee's unethical conduct (e.g., the supervisee's sexual exploitation \
of a patient, the supervisee's failure to report child abuse). \
\
The introduction defines modifiers that are used throughout the Code (e.g., reasonably, \
appropriate, potentially), with the goal of ensuring flexibility and the use of judgment in \
the application of the standards. The term reasonable is defined as "the prevailing \
professional judgment of psychologists engaged in similar activities in similar \
circumstances, given the knowledge the psychologist had or should have had at the time." \
\
When making decisions regarding ethics, psychologists are supposed to consider the Ethics \
Code, applicable laws, psychology board regulations, the guidelines of other scientific and \
professional organizations, and "the dictates of their own conscience." They are also \
supposed to consult with colleagues. When the Ethics Code sets a higher standard of \
conduct than the law, psychologists are bound to uphold "the higher ethical standard." \
However, when there is a conflict between ethics and law (i.e., meeting the ethical \
commitment would seem to violate the law), psychologists must "make known their \
commitment to the Ethics Code and take steps to resolve the conflict." \
\
PSYCHPREP          Copyright \'80 2019 Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 3/Ethics/2 \
 \
\
                                            Section 3 - Ethics: Preamble \
\
                    3.2 PREAMBLE \
\
The Preamble states that the goals of the Ethics Code are "the welfare and protection of the \
individuals and groups with whom psychologists work," as well as "the education of \
members, students, and the public regarding ethical standards of the discipline." The \
preamble makes several other points: \
\
        Psychologists work toward increasing scientific and professional knowledge of \
        behavior and people's understanding of themselves. \
        The goal of psychologists is to improve the condition of individuals, \
        organizations, and society. \
        Psychologists respect and protect civil and human rights and the principles of \
        freedom of inquiry and expression. \
        Psychologists engage in a variety of roles, such as researcher, educator, \
        diagnostician, therapist, supervisor, consultant, administrator, social \
        interventionist, and expert witness. \
        Psychologists make a personal commitment to act ethically; they encourage the \
        ethical behavior of others; and they consult with others regarding ethical \
        problems. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Five General Principles \
\
         3.3 FIVE GENERAL PRINCIPLES \
\
Before listing the five General Principles, the Ethics Code once again emphasizes that they \
are aspirational in nature and should never be used to impose sanctions on psychologists. \
\
>PRINCIPLE A: BENEFICENCE AND NONMALEFICENCE Psychologists aim "to \
benefit those with whom they work and take care to do no harm." They safeguard the \
welfare and rights of the people they interact with professionally as well as the welfare of \
animals used in research. They attempt to resolve conflicts among their professional \
obligations in a responsible manner that minimizes harm. They guard against the misuse \
of their influence. They are aware of how their own physical and mental health may affect \
their capacity to help others. \
\
>PRINCIPLE B: FIDELITY AND RESPONSIBILITY The principle of fidelity and \
responsibility recognizes that "psychologists establish relationships of trust with those with \
whom they work." Psychologists should be aware of their responsibilities to these people \
and should uphold professional standards. Toward this end, psychologists are encouraged \
to clarify their roles, manage conflicts of interest that may cause harm, and consult and \
cooperate with other professionals. Psychologists should be concerned with the ethical \
compliance of others. Finally, psychologists are encouraged to contribute some of their \
professional services for little or no compensation. \
\
>PRINCIPLE C: INTEGRITY In all their professional activities, psychologists should \
promote "accuracy, honesty, and truthfulness" and should avoid all fraudulent activities. \
Commitments and promises should be made carefully and then upheld. Although ethically \
permissible in certain situations, deception should be used only with great care. \
\
>PRINCIPLE D: JUSTICE This principle recognizes that all persons should benefit \
from the contributions of psychology and should be treated with equal quality in all \
psychological activities. It enjoins psychologists to ensure that their own biases and \
limitations of competence do not result in unjust practices. \
\
>PRINCIPLE E: RESPECT FOR PEOPLE'S RIGHTS AND DIGNITY Respect for \
rights and dignity includes respect for the rights of privacy, confidentiality, and self- \
determination. Psychologists should recognize and respect differences among persons \
based on age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national origin, religion, \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Five General Principles \
\
sexual orientation, disability, language, and socioeconomic status. Psychologists should \
also consider these factors when providing psychological services. Furthermore, \
psychologists should try to eliminate the effect of biases based on these factors, both in \
their own work and in the work of others. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
          3.4 TEN ETHICAL STANDARDS \
\
1. RESOLVING ETHICAL ISSUES \
\
1.01 MISUSE OF PSYCHOLOGISTS' WORK Psychologists should take steps to \
correct the misuse or misrepresentation of their work. \
\
1.02 CONFLICTS BETWEEN ETHICS AND LAW (Amended; Effective June 1. \
2010) When conflicts arise between ethics and law, regulations, or other governing legal \
authority, psychologists should "clarify the nature of the conflict, make known their \
commitment to the Ethics Code and take reasonable steps to resolve the conflict" in a \
manner consistent with the Ethics Code. The code explicitly states that psychologists may \
never use this standard "to justify or defend violating human rights." \
\
1.03 CONFLICTS BETWEEN ETHICS AND ORGANIZATIONAL DEMANDS \
(Amended; Effective June 1, 2010) When conflicts occur between the Ethics Code and the \
demands of an organization, psychologists should "clarify the nature of the conflict, make \
known their commitment to the Ethics Code, and take reasonable steps to resolve the \
conflict" in a manner consistent with the Ethics Code. The code explicitly states that \
psychologists may never use this standard "to justify or defend violating human rights." \
\
1.04 INFORMAL RESOLUTION OF ETHICAL VIOLATIONS If psychologists \
know of an ethical violation by another psychologist, they should speak directly to the \
colleague, assuming an "informal resolution" seems appropriate and confidentiality will \
not be violated. \
\
1.05 REPORTING ETHICAL VIOLATIONS If the attempt at an informal resolution \
is unsuccessful, or if the violation is inappropriate for an informal resolution (e.g., \
substantial harm has occurred or may occur), psychologists should take further action, such \
as referral to ethics committees or licensing boards. However, such action should not be \
taken if confidentiality rights will be violated, or if the psychologists were retained to \
review the work of another psychologist whose conduct was in question. \
\
In addressing ethical misconduct of colleagues, it is necessary to consider three things: 1) \
how you came to learn about the offense; 2) the type and severity of the offense committed; \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
and 3) if an informal resolution is attempted, the colleague's response to the attempted \
resolution. \
\
If you learn of the ethical violation directly from your client: If a client, in the course of \
therapy, tells you about another psychologist's offense, you must protect the client's \
confidentiality above all. You may not make a report to the ethics board or state licensing \
board imless authorized by the client (with a release of information). You should also \
provide the client with the necessary information and let the client decide whether to make \
a report. \
\
For example, your client tells you that her previous psychologist, whom you know, often \
made self-disclosing remarks during their sessions, and on several occasions, asked your \
client for feedback about matters relating to his personal life. Your client also tells you that \
on some occasions this therapist tried to hug her against her will. The client's allegations \
against this psychologist seem quite serious. However, you may not make a report to an \
ethics committee or state licensing board because you may not violate the client's \
confidentiality. You should educate the client about what is considered to be appropriate \
and inappropriate conduct for psychologists, as well as about her right to report this \
psychologist, \
\
If you learn of the ethical violation through other means: If you learn about the offense \
by directly observing it, or by hearing about it from the colleague or from someone who is \
not your client, consider the severity of the act. If it is a minor offense, you should first \
discuss the offense with the colleague and explain why the actions were imethical. If the \
psychologist appropriately responds to your attempts at an informal resolution, there is \
nothing more that you need to do. If the psychologist does not respond, you may then file \
a formal complaint. If it is a severe offense, you should report the colleague to an ethics \
committee or state licensing board. \
\
For example, a psychologist who shares office space with you does not lock her filing \
cabinet that contains confidential information. You should first discuss this matter with \
your colleague and inform her that her actions are unethical and illegal. If your colleague \
does not change her behavior, you should consider discussing the matter with the state \
licensing board or ethics committee to find out if you need to file a formal complaint. \
\
Or, a colleague confides in you that he is stressed, and has not been himself because he is \
going through a divorce. He reveals that he is having sex with one of his current clients \
and feels very guilty about it. Even though your colleague does feel guilty, his behavior is \
unethical and illegal and very serious in nature. It is therefore not a matter that can be \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
resolved informally. In this situation, you would make a report to the ethics committee or \
state licensing board. \
\
1.06 COOPERATING WITH ETHICS COMMITTEES Failure to cooperate with an \
ethics investigation, whether by APA or a state psychological association, constitutes an \
ethical violation in and of itself. APA cannot suspend or revoke a psychologist's license. \
However, they can inform the state board of any complaints received, and any action taken \
against a psychologist. \
\
1.07 IMPROPER COMPLAINTS Psychologists should not file or encourage the filing \
of ethics complaints that deliberately disregard the facts of a situation. \
\
1.08 UNFAIR DISCRIMINATION    AGAINST COMPLAINANTS    AND \
RESPONDENTS Psychologists should not discriminate against a person because he or \
she has been the subject of an ethics complaint (e.g., discrimination in hiring or promotion). \
However, psychologists are permitted to take action based on the outcome of such \
proceedings. In other words, an employer cannot refuse to hire someone because of an \
unresolved ethics complaint pending against him or her, but if the complaint was \
adjudicated and the person is found guilty of an ethics violation, the employer may take \
this fact into consideration, \
\
2. COMPETENCE \
\
2.01 BOUNDARIES OF COMPETENCE Psychologists should practice within the \
boundaries of their competence. When an understanding of the effect of certain factors \
(age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national origin, religion, sexual \
orientation, disability, language, and socioeconomic status) is necessary for appropriate \
services or research, psychologists must make sure that they either have or obtain \
appropriate training, supervision, or consultation; otherwise, psychologists should make an \
appropriate referral, except in an emergency situation (see below). When they desire to \
practice in new areas, psychologists should also seek appropriate consultation, supervision, \
or training. \
\
The decision to seek consultation, supervision, training, or to refer out should always be \
based on the best interests of the client. Consultation is most commonly sought on a one- \
time or occasional basis. Supervision, by contrast, is generally considered to be an on- \
going process with careful scrutiny of a case. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
>CONSULTATION   Consultations are appropriate when psychologists are somewhat \
familiar with treating a particular disorder but are not an expert in that area, or when \
psychologists have concerns about whether they can remain objective in treating a client. \
For example, a client comes 10 see a psychologist and presents with symptoms of \
Agoraphobia. The psychologist has had little experience treating agoraphobia, but she \
regularly treats clients with Panic Disorder and other anxiety disorders. As another \
example of consultation, a man seeks treatment with a female psychologist. The \
psychologist notices that she is attracted to this man and begins to feel rather self- \
conscious during sessions with him. She becomes concerned about her ability to provide \
effective treatment for this man. \
\
>SUPERVISION Supervision might be required when psychologists are applying a \
newly learned technique such as hypnosis or biofeedback, beginning to work with a \
specialized population such as the hearing-impaired, or treating a client with a disorder \
the psychologist has training in, but no clinical experience (e.g., Bulimia Nervosa). \
Typically, supervision is sought when psychologists are not yet ready to practice \
independently in the area or with the new population. \
\
>TRAINING Training is vital when psychologists are unfamiliar with a certain area of \
knowledge. Training is usually followed by supervised experience prior to practicing \
independently. For example, a psychologist specializes in psychological testing with \
adults. She would like to expand her practice by offering psychological testing to \
adolescents. However, she has not tested any adolescents since her predoctoral internship \
10 years ago, and has not used any recent instruments for adolescents. This psychologist \
would first need to imdergo the necessary training, (e.g., seminars, reading relevant \
literature), and would then benefit from supervision by a psychologist who specializes in \
testing adolescents in order to help her develop the necessary level of competence in this \
area. \
\
>REFERRING OUT Referring out clients is appropriate in the following situations: a) \
the therapist's personal beliefs and issues interfere with the therapy; b) the client feels \
uncomfortable with the therapist; or c) the therapist lacks competence in treating the \
presenting problem. For example, a psychologist who considers herself a feminist is \
referred a female client who has very traditional beliefs about marriage and women's role \
in society. The psychologist finds that she experiences anger and frustration during her \
first session with this woman, to the point that she is unable to understand this woman's \
difficulties and worldview. She also finds that at times, she is trying to assert her own ideas \
about the need to consider women's rights. Or, a man seeks treatment with a psychologist \
and wants help to overcome huis fear of driving on the freeway. The psychologist practices \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
psychoanalytically oriented therapy, and has not worked behaviorally since his internship, \
which was 15 years ago. \
\
The Ethics Code stipulates that psychologists may provide services for which they are not \
fully competent if an individual would otherwise be unable to obtain mental health \
services. Psychologists must have closely related prior training and experience in the area \
and must then pursue further training or study in order to obtain the necessary competence. \
\
In emerging areas in which clear guidelines for competence have not already been \
established, psychologists should take "reasonable steps to ensure competence." \
Psychologists who participate in forensic activities should ensure that they are "reasonably \
familiar with the judicial or administrative rules governing their roles." \
\
2.02 PROVIDING SERVICES IN EMERGENCIES The Ethics Code states that in \
clinical emergencies, psychologists may provide services for which they are not fully \
competent in order to ensure that individuals receive necessary treatment. They should \
terminate the services as soon as the emergency has passed or more appropriate services \
have been secured. \
\
2.03 MAINTAINING COMPETENCE Psychologists should make an ongoing effort \
to maintain competence. \
\
2.04 BASES FOR   SCIENTIFIC AND PROFESSIONAL    JUDGMENTS \
Psychologists should always base their work on the scientific and professional knowledge \
that has been established in the field of psychology. \
\
2.05 DELEGATION OF WORK TO OTHERS Psychologists should ensure that those \
to whom they delegate work (e.g., supervisees or interpreters) perform only those duties \
for which they have adequate competence and that these delegated individuals have no \
harmful multiple relationship with the persons being served. In addition, psychologists \
should ensure that the services are performed competently. \
\
2.06 PERSONAL PROBLEMS AND CONFLICTS Psychologists should not initiate \
any activity when they know or should know that their personal problems will impair their \
competence. They are required to address their problems appropriately and to seek \
consultation about whether to limit, suspend, or terminate practice. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
3. HUMAN RELATIONS \
\
3.01 UNFAIR DISCRIMINATION Psychologists should not engage in unfair \
discrimination based on age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national \
origin, religion, sexual orientation, disability, socioeconomic status, or any other basis \
prohibited by law. \
\
3.02 SEXUAL HARASSMENT Sexual harassment is specifically prohibited, and it is \
defined as sexual behavior that meets one of the following two criteria: 1) behavior that "is \
unwelcome, is offensive, or creates a hostile workplace or educational environment, and \
the psychologist knows or is told this;" or 2) behavior that is so severe that any reasonable \
person would recognize it as abusive. \
\
3.03 OTHER HARASSMENT Psychologists are also prohibited from engaging in any \
other harassment based on age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national \
origin, religion, sexual orientation, disability, language, or socioeconomic status. \
\
3.04 AVOIDING HARM (Amended; Effective Jan 1, 2017) In general, psychologists are \
enjoined to avoid harming clients and others whenever possible, and to minimize harm \
when it is unavoidable. Psychologists are prohibited from assisting or engaging in torture. \
Torture is defined as intentionally inflicting severe mental or physical pain or suffering on \
another. \
\
3.05 MULTIPLE RELATIONSHIPS The Ethics Code provides a definition for multiple \
relationships: "A multiple relationship occurs when a psychologist is in a professional role \
with a person and (1) at the same time is in another role with the person, (2) at the same \
time is in a relationship with a person closely associated with or related to the person . .. \
or (3) promises to enter into another relationship in the future with the person or a person \
closely associated with or related to the person." Put more simply, a multiple relationship \
exists when a therapist enters into a non-professional relationship with a current client, or \
with someone close to the client (e.g., the client's boyfriend or sister). Examples of multiple \
relationships include seeing a client socially or being in a business relationship with \
someone close to the client. \
\
A psychologist should not enter into a multiple relationship if it might impair the \
psychologist's objectivity, competence, or effectiveness, or if it might harm or exploit the \
other party. The Ethics Code explicitly states that a multiple relationship is not in and of \
itself unethical: "Multiple relationships that would not reasonably be expected to cause \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Standards \
\
impairment or risk exploitation or harm are not unethical." It is frequently a judgment call \
as to whether a given multiple relationship might impair objectivity or harm the client; \
nevertheless, some situations are more obviously problematic and should ahvays be \
avoided (e.g., treating your best friend's husband). \
\
If due to unforeseen factors, a harmful multiple relationship does occur, the psychologist \
should "attempt to resolve it with due regard for the best interests of the affected person \
and maximal compliance with the Ethics Code." For example, in some situations a \
psychologist might end the non-professional contact with the client; in others, the \
psychologist might appropriately terminate the therapy. \
\
When psychologists are required to serve in more than one role in a judicial or \
administrative proceeding (e.g., appearing as a consultant for one party and a fact witness \
for the court), they should clarify their roles and the limits of confidentiality, and update \
this clarification as often as changes occur. \
\
With regard to custody evaluations, APA's Guidelines for Child Custody Evaluations in \
Family Law Proceedings (2010) state that a psychologist conducting a custody evaluation \
with a current or prior client or conducting therapy with a current or prior custody \
examinee are both considered multiple relationships. Although not explicitly prohibited in \
the guidelines, the general interpretation/consensus is that these multiple relationships \
should be avoided. APA's guidelines state that, "Psychologists' ethical obligations \
regarding conflicts of interest and multiple relationships provide an explainable and \
understandable basis for declining court appointments and private referrals." This does \
not preclude the psychologist from testifying as a fact witness concerning the child's \
treatment, but when this is the case, the psychologist should generally decline the role of \
an expert witness who is giving a professional opinion regarding custody and visitation. \
\
With regard to multiple relationships in parole evaluations, most correctional \
psychologists are in the position of being both a therapist and an evaluator for parole and \
release. Ethical guidelines for correctional psychologists encourage sensitivity to the \
ethical pitfalls inherent in this dual relationship but it is definitely a permitted relationship. \
\
3.06 CONFLICT OF INTEREST Psychologists should not enter into a professional \
relationship with someone with whom they already have other relationships or involvement \
(e.g., financial or personal) if the result would be that the psychologist's objectivity, \
competence, or effectiveness would be impaired, or that the other party would suffer harm \
or exploitation. \
\
PSYCHPREP          Copyright @ 2019 Sharon Jablon. Ph.D. Section 3/Ethics/12 \
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
3.07 THIRD PARTY REQUESTS FOR SERVICES When psychologists provide \
services at the request of a third party (e.g., an insurance company, EAP, the courts). \
psychologists should clarify at the outset of treatment their role (e.g., therapist, \
diagnostician), who the client is, the probable uses of the services (e.g., assessment \
information being used to judge a defendant's competence), and any limits to \
confidentiality. For example, if a client's care will be covered by an insurance company, \
the psychologist should clarify with the company the extent of coverage and what \
information it will need, and then inform the client. With regard to Employee Assistance \
Programs (EAPs), supervisors are sometimes allowed to make compliance with treatment \
a condition for an individual's continued employment with the company. In these \
situations, the employee must provide the treating psychologist with a written authorization \
for the release of this information. In general, such an authorization with specify that the \
psychologist can inform the supervisor about the employee's attendance at sessions and \
the employee's agreement to comply with the proposed treatment plan. \
Employers/supervisors are never entitled to information about the content of sessions. \
\
3.08 EXPLOITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS Psychologists shouldn't exploit people \
over whom they are in a position of power, such as clients, students, supervisees, research \
participants, and employees. \
\
3.09 COOPERATION WITH OTHER PROFESSIONALS   Psychologists should \
cooperate with other professionals, as appropriate, in order to serve the best interests of \
their clients. \
\
3.10 INFORMED CONSENT When psychologists engage in research, assessment, \
therapy, counseling, or consultation (whether in person or via electronic means), they must \
secure informed consent from the individuals with whom they work. The language used \
must be reasonably understandable to the clients. An exception to this requirement occurs \
when laws or governmental regulations mandate conducting these activities without \
consent. For example, in a court-ordered evaluation, consent is not obtained. The client is, \
however, informed of the purpose of the evaluation and limits of confidentiality. \
\
When clients are legally incapable of giving consent (e.g., a minor), psychologists must \
obtain permission from a legally authorized person (e.g., legal guardian). Psychologists \
must also provide these clients with an explanation, seek their assent, and consider their \
wishes and best interests. Psychologists should also protect the rights and welfare of these \
persons even when consent from a legally authorized person is not mandated or not \
permitted by law. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
When persons are court ordered or mandated to obtain psychological services, \
psychologists should inform them of the nature of the services to be provided, of the fact \
that the services have been mandated, and of any limits to confidentiality. \
\
Psychologists should appropriately document that informed consent or assent has been \
secured, whether it was secured in a written or oral format. The Ethics Code does not \
specify that informed consent must be secured in a written format, such as an "informed \
consent form," common in many therapy practices. It only requires that informed consent \
be documented, as in a progress note recording that information was given and \
understood. Nevertheless, it is generally considered to be standard practice to secure \
informed consent in writing in most situations. \
\
3.11 PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERED TO      OR THROUGH \
ORGANIZATIONS   When psychologists work in or for organizations, they should \
thoroughly inform clients and those affected by the services about the following issues: the \
nature of the psychological services, the intended recipients, which persons are clients, the \
relationship between the psychologist and each person and between the psychologist and \
the organization, the probable uses of the services and information, who will have access \
to the information, and any limits of confidentiality. Psychologists should provide feedback \
after evaluation and treatment. If feedback is precluded for legal or organizational reasons \
(e.g., in certain court proceedings or some employee evaluations), psychologists should \
inform the person of this fact ahead of time. For instance, when psychologists are \
appointed by the court to evaluate a defendant, they should explain that feedback will not \
be shared with the defendant. \
\
3.12 INTERRUPTION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES Psychologists must \
make plans for continuation of care in the event of their relocation, illness, death, or in the \
event of the client's relocation or financial limitations. These plans are often being termed \
"a professional will." The Ethics Code qualifies this requirement with the statement \
"unless otherwise covered by contract." This provision is intended to clarify that \
psychologists are not abandoning clients and do not have further ethical responsibilities \
when a managed care company restricts the number of sessions or requires termination. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
4. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY \
\
4.01 MAINTAINING CONFIDENTIALITY The Ethics Code emphasizes that \
psychologists have a primary obligation to protect the confidential information they obtain. \
\
4.02 DISCUSSING THE LIMITS OF CONFIDENTIALITY Psychologists must \
discuss the limits of confidentiality with any persons or organizations with whom they \
work. They must also discuss the possible uses of any information that is obtained (e.g., as \
part of a court assessment, as part of a report to a supervisor in an organizational \
intervention). Confidentiality is generally discussed at the outset of treatment, and \
whenever there are relevant changes in circumstances (e.g., a fee-for-service client begins \
to use an insurance company). If electronic transmission is used (e.g., email), psychologists \
must inform clients of the possible risks to privacy and any additional limits to \
confidentiality. \
\
4.03 RECORDING Permission for taping or videotaping must be secured from clients. \
\
4.04 MINIMIZING INTRUSIONS ON PRIVACY Psychologists should discuss \
confidential information obtained from clients only for scientific or professional purposes, \
and should include only the confidential information that is necessary when preparing oral \
or written reports. \
\
4.05 DISCLOSURES Confidential information may be disclosed when the client gives \
consent. Confidential information may be shared without client consent when the \
disclosure is either permitted by law (e.g., to protect the client, psychologist, or other from \
harm; to obtain appropriate professional consultation; or to provide necessary professional \
services), or when the disclosure is mandated by law (e.g., Tarasoff, child or elder abuse \
reporting). Mandated reporting laws with regard to abuse reporting (what constitutes \
abuse, how the report is made) and Tarasoff vary from state to state. Most states have \
adopted some version of California's Tarasoff statute, requiring psychologists to notify \
the intended victim and the police, and take other reasonable steps (e.g., hospitalization) \
when a patient communicates to the psychologist a threat of imminent violence against a \
reasonably identifiable victim. Although psychologists may disclose confidential \
information without client consent in order to obtain payment for services (e.g., using \
billing services), they should only disclose the smallest amount of information that is \
necessary. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
4.06 CONSULTATIONS During consultations, psychologists should not reveal detailed \
information that could lead to identification of a client unless they have obtained prior \
consent or the disclosure cannot be avoided. Psychologists should only share information \
that is absolutely necessary for the purposes of the consultation. \
\
4.07 USE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION FOR DIDACTIC OR OTHER \
PURPOSES When psychologists lecture or write, they must not include confidential \
information unless the person has consented in writing or there is legal authorization to do \
so. Otherwise, confidential information should be disguised. \
\
Issues of confidentiality are involved in subpoenas, court orders, court-appointed \
evaluation, and court-ordered therapy. \
\
>SUBPOENAS Subpoenas are usually issued by attorneys, and may be a subpoena alone \
(requiring the therapist to appear for questioning) or a subpoena duces tecum (requiring \
the therapist to appear with the client records). Subpoenas cannot be ignored. When a \
subpoena is received, a psychologist should first contact the client, inform the client of the \
subpoena, and seek the client's permission to release information. If the client grants \
permission, the psychologist may release the records. If the client does not grant \
permission, the psychologist may first contact the attorney who issued the subpoena, \
requesting that the subpoena be quashed (nullified or voided). If the subpoena is not \
quashed, the psychologist must appear at the designated location (courthouse or attorney's \
office) and bring any requested records. However, the psychologist should then assert \
patient-therapist privilege, and neither testify nor turn over the records, unless ordered to \
do so by the court. \
\
>COURT ORDERS In contrast to a subpoena, a court order is signed by a judge and \
carries the weight of law. A psychologist may always request that the judge modify the \
court order (e.g., the psychologist may point out that portions of the record are not relevant \
to the legal case and request that only part of the record be revealed). Ultimately, however, \
the psychologist must comply with any court order or be held in contempt of court. \
Throughout, the psychologist should maintain frequent communication with the client and \
the client's attorney. \
\
>COURT-APPOINTED EVALUATION     In a court-appointed evaluation, a \
psychologist is retained by the court to evaluate a defendant (e.g., for competency to stand \
trial, for evaluation of insanity, etc.). In this situation, the results of the evaluation are to \
be shared with the court, and the defendant has no confidentiality rights. There is also no \
requirement that the psychologist get the defendant's consent to participate. However, the \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Eucal Standards \
\
psychologist must explain the nature of the evaluation and the limits of confidentiality to \
the defendant prior to beginning the evaluation. Any and all information gathered in a \
court-appointed evaluation may be shared with the court; no signed release of information \
is needed. \
\
>COURT-ORDERED THERAPY By contrast, in court-ordered therapy, the court has \
ordered a defendant to seek therapy as a condition of Iris or her sentence. In this situation, \
the defendant generally seeks out a therapist (or program). At the end of treatment, or \
periodically throughout treatment, the court requests information from the treating \
therapist. The psychologist who agrees to treat this client must make sure to clarify the \
nature of the treatment that has been ordered by the court, as well as the information that \
the court needs. The psychologist must then discuss this information with the client and \
obtain informed consent. In addition, the psychologist must generally obtain a signed \
release of information from the client in order to be able to communicate with the court. \
\
One way to remember the differences between court-appointed evaluation and court- \
ordered therapy is to ask the question, "Who is the client?" In court-appointed evaluations, \
the court hires the psychologist and the client is the court. The court has the right to the \
information and there is no confidentiality or need for a release. In court-ordered therapy, \
the client hires the psychologist. The client is the client, and therefore the client has \
confidentiality rights and there is a need for a release. \
\
Confidentiality is the client's right to have communications kept within the bounds of the \
professional client-therapist relationship. Confidential communications are generally not \
to be revealed to third parties. A third party is anyone outside of the professional \
relationship. Privilege is the client's right to keep confidential from being \
disclosed in a legal proceeding. If a client does not want the psychologist to disclose \
confidential communications in a court of law, deposition, etc., the client may invoke or \
assert privilege (or have the psychologist do so on the client's behalf). A court-appointed \
evaluation is considered an exception to privilege; thus, while typically the client holds \
privilege (the right to keep confidential information out of court), in a court-appointed \
evaluation, privilege does not exist. \
\
5. ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC STATEMENTS \
\
5.01 AVOIDANCE OF FALSE OR DECEPTIVE STATEMENTS Public statements \
basically include any written or oral statement in any form other than an entirely private \
conversation or letter. For example, they include advertising, licensing applications, \
brochures, directory listings, curricula vitae, interviews, lectures, and published material. \
\
PSYCHPREP          Copyright @ 2019 Sharon Jablon. Ph.D. Section 3/Ethics/17 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
Psychologists should never make intentionally deceptive statements regarding their \
training and experience, their academic degrees, their credentials, their affiliations, their \
services, the scientific and clinical basis for their services, their fees, or their publications \
and research findings. Finally, when psychologists are presenting their credentials that are \
relevant to their health service (e.g. in advertisements or employment applications), they \
should present only those degrees that are the basis for their psychology licensure, or that \
they received from a regionally accredited institution. \
\
5.02 STATEMENTS BY OTHERS   Psychologists retain responsibility for public \
statements even when they hire someone else to promote them or their practice. \
Psychologists must try to prevent others (e.g., employers) from making any deceptive \
statements and correct them when possible. It is prohibited to compensate a media \
employee for publicity or reporting (e.g., paying a reporter to write an article about a \
psychologist's practice). When paid ads are used, they must be identified as such. \
\
5.03 DESCRIPTIONS OF WORKSHOPS AND NON-DEGREE-GRANTING \
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS Psychologists must exercise whatever control they have \
to make sure that published material (e.g., brochures, announcements) about non-degree- \
granting programs (e.g., workshops) contain accurate information regarding the intended \
audience, the objectives, the presenters, and the fees. \
\
5.04 MEDIA PRESENTATIONS When psychologists provide public advice (e.g., \
lectures, radio or television programs, web sites), their statements must be based on \
appropriate psychological literature and practice, must be consistent with the Ethics Code, \
and must make clear that there is no therapeutic relationship established. Specifically, \
media psychologists should make it clear that they are not providing treatment, but are \
only offering advice or feedback. \
\
5.05 TESTIMONIALS The Ethics Code allows for solicitation and use of testimonials \
under certain narrowly circumscribed situations. They may never be solicited from current \
clients, or from any persons who are vulnerable to undue influence. \
\
5.06 IN-PERSON SOLICITATION Solicitation of new business is also prohibited \
when people are vulnerable to undue influence. The Ethics Code specifies that this \
prohibition does not apply to providing disaster or community outreach services. So, it \
would be unethical for a psychologist to walk up to people involved in a car accident and \
encourage them to come to the psychologist's office for treatment, but it would be ethical \
to work with a community disaster response team, assessing affected individuals and giving \
them appropriate referrals for treatment. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
6. RECORD KEEPING AND FEES \
\
6.01 DOCUMENTATION OF PROFESSIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC WORK AND \
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS To the extent they have control, psychologists should \
create and maintain records of their professional work with the following goals in mind: 1) \
to facilitate future provision of services; 2) to allow for replication of research results; 3) \
to meet institutional requirements; 4) to ensure accuracy in billing; and 5) to comply with \
the law. \
\
6.02 MAINTENANCE, DISSEMINATION, AND DISPOSAL OF CONFIDENTIAL \
RECORDS OF PROFESSIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC WORK To the extent they have \
control, psychologists create, maintain, and destroy records in a manner that protects \
confidentiality. When client information is entered into databases, appropriate measures \
should be taken to protect confidentiality, including coding of personal identifiers. \
Psychologists should make advance plans to protect the confidentiality of records and data \
in case of their death or incapacity. \
\
6.03 WITHHOLDING RECORDS FOR NONPAYMENT    Psychologists may not \
withhold records that are necessary for emergency treatment because a client owes them \
money. This ethical standard conflicts with current federal law regarding the withholding \
of records in non-emergency situations. According to the Health Insurance Portability and \
Accountability Act (HIPAA), a psychologist may not withhold records for nonpayment \
under any circumstances. In other words, it is technically ethical but actually illegal to \
withhold records for nonpayment in a non-emergency situation. The bottom line, therefore, \
is that a psychologist should not withhold records for non-payment in any situation, \
emergency or otherwise. \
\
6.04 FEES AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS Fees and billing arrangements \
must be agreed upon "as early as is feasible in a professional or scientific relationship." \
Fee practices must be consistent with the law, and psychologists may not misrepresent their \
fees. Psychologists must also inform clients before using a collection agency, and they \
must provide clients with the opportunity to make prompt payment. Psychologists do not \
have to inform clients at the outset of treatment that they may use a collection agency at \
some later time. Psychologists must, however, give clients sufficient warning before a \
collection agency will be used so that clients have the opportunity to pay their bill before \
it goes to the collection agency. In addition, only the most limited information should be \
disclosed, typically just the client's name and the amount of money owed. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
6.05 BARTER WITH CLIENTS/PATIENTS The Ethics Code defines bartering as "the \
acceptance of goods, services, or other nonmonetary remuneration from clients/patients in \
return for psychological services." Bartering is permissible as long as it is not clinically \
contraindicated and not exploitative. Bartering tends to be especially common in rural \
commimities. \
\
6.06 ACCURACY IN REPORTS TO PAYORS AND FUNDING SOURCES \
Psychologists must provide accurate information to payors (e.g., insurance companies) and \
to sources of research funding. Diagnoses, fees, services provided, and similar information \
must all be accurately stated. Many insurance companies provide coverage only for certain \
diagnoses and exclude other conditions. Psychologists may not submit false diagnoses or \
exaggerate their clients' problems in order to ensure continuation of coverage, nor may \
they understate diagnoses in an effort to reduce stigma. \
\
6.07 REFERRALS AND FEES Any payments or fee-splitting between psychologists \
and other professionals must be based on services provided (clinical, consultative, \
administrative or other). Psychologists may never pay another professional for a referral. \
\
7. EDUCATION AND TRAINING \
\
7.01 DESIGN OF EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMS Psychologists who \
are responsible for educational and training programs must ensure that the programs are \
designed to provide appropriate education and experience and to meet the requirements of \
licensure or other goals stated by the program. \
\
7.02 DESCRIPTIONS OF   EDUCATION AND   TRAINING PROGRAMS \
Psychologists must ensure that descriptions of education and training programs are \
accurate in terms of their content, goals, stipends, as well as any requirements for \
counseling. \
\
7.03 ACCURACY IN TEACHING Course outlines and syllabi should be accurate and \
not misleading. Instructors may nevertheless change or adapt course outlines when \
necessary, as long as students are still given the opportunity to fulfill course requirements. \
When teaching or training, psychologists should present information accurately. \
\
7.04 STUDENT DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION Instructors may \
not require students to disclose personal information in a course (e.g., history of abuse, \
sexual history, history of treatment) unless the educational program has made this \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
requirement clear in its admission and program materials. Such information may be \
required, however, if it is necessary to help students who are having personal problems that \
interfere in their clinical work, or that pose a risk of harm. This provision is intended to \
provide better safeguards for the privacy of graduate students. \
\
7.05 MANDATORY INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP THERAPY If an educational \
program requires participation in individual or group therapy, students must have the \
option of obtaining treatment from practitioners who are not associated with the program. \
Similarly, instructors who will be evaluating a student's work may not provide therapy to \
that student. The program may require that it approves the credentials of outside therapists. \
This provision is intended to protect graduate students and to prevent harmful multiple \
relationships. \
\
7.06 ASSESSING STUDENT AND SUPERVISEE PERFORMANCE Psychologists \
must provide feedback to students and supervisees, and inform them of the process for that \
feedback at the outset of the relationship. Evaluations should be made on "the basis of . .. \
actual performance on relevant and established program requirements." \
\
7.07 SEXUAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH STUDENTS AND SUPERVISEES \
Psychologists should not engage in sexual relationships with current students or \
supervisees or those over whom they have or will have evaluative authority. For example, \
a training director may not have a sexual relationship with an intern even if he does not \
directly supervise her, because he will nevertheless be involved in her evaluation. The \
implication is that psychologists should also not date current or future students or \
supervisees. However, the Ethics Code does not prohibit having a sexual relationship with \
former students or supervisees as it does with former clients. \
\
8. RESEARCH AND PUBLICATION \
\
8.01 INSTITUTIONAL APPROVAL When it is required, psychologists should provide \
accurate information and obtain appropriate approval from host institutions or \
organizations before conducting research. \
\
8.02 INFORMED CONSENT TO RESEARCH   Informed consent in the research \
setting should include information about the following: 1) the purpose of the research, its \
duration, and procedures; 2) the subjects' right to decline or withdraw from participating; \
3) the foreseeable consequences of declining or withdrawing; 4) the factors that might \
significantly affect the decision to participate (e.g., risks, discomfort, adverse effects, or \
\
PSYCHPREP          Copyright \'80 2019 Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 3/Ethics/21 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
confidentiality limits); 5) prospective research benefits; 6) limits of confidentiality; 7) \
incentives for participation; and 8) a contact person for questions and concerns. Questions \
from the prospective subjects should also be answered. There are few exceptions to the \
requirement of informed consent in research (see 8.05). Even research involving deception \
requires informed consent. \
\
If the research involves the use of experimental treatments, informed consent should also \
include information about the following: 1) the experimental nature of the treatment; 2) the \
availability or non-availability of treatment for the control group; 3) how subjects are \
assigned to groups; 4) available treatment alternatives if the subject declines or withdraws \
from the research; and 5) compensation for or costs of participating, as well as whether \
third party reimbursement will be sought. \
\
8.03 INFORMED CONSENT FOR RECORDING VOICES AND IMAGES IN \
RESEARCH Informed consent is necessary before the use of filming or recording in \
research. One exception to this requirement is the use of naturalistic observations in which \
personal identification and harm are avoided. Another exception is the use of recording in \
a research design that involves deception. In such cases, consent for the recording must be \
obtained during the debriefing. \
\
8.04 CLIENT/PATIENT, STUDENT, AND   SUBORDINATE RESEARCH \
PARTICIPANTS When research subjects are clients, students or other subordinates, \
psychologists must take care to protect them from any adverse consequences due to \
declining or withdrawing from the research. When participation in research is part of a \
course requirement or an option for extra credit, other alternatives must be made available \
for students to obtain credit. \
\
8.05 DISPENSING WITH INFORMED CONSENT FOR RESEARCH Psychologists \
may dispense with informed consent when permitted by law or institutional regulations. In \
addition, they may dispense with informed consent if the research is unlikely to create \
distress or harm in one of the following situations: 1) normal educational practices; 2) \
anonymous questionnaires, naturalistic observations, or archival research; and 3) the study \
of a job or organization's effectiveness. \
\
8.06 OFFERING INDUCEMENTS FOR RESEARCH PARTICIPATION When \
professional services are offered to induce people to participate in a study, psychologists \
have to clarify the nature of the services offered, including possible risks and limitations. \
Excessive financial or other inducements are prohibited as they may act as coercion. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
8.07 DECEPTION IN RESEARCH Deception in research is to be avoided unless: 1) it \
is justified by the study's "significant prospective scientific, educational, or applied value;" \
and 2) alternative procedures, without deception, are not available. Nevertheless, \
psychologists may never deceive prospective subjects about research that may cause \
physical pain or emotional distress. Furthermore, subjects must be debriefed regarding the \
deception as early as possible, usually at the end of their participation, but definitely no \
later than at the end of data collection. \
\
8.08 DEBRIEFING Participants are entitled to a prompt opportunity to obtain \
information about the research, including its results and conclusions. When participants \
have suffered harm, psychologists must take reasonable steps to reduce this harm. \
\
8.09 HUMANE CARE AND USE OF ANIMALS IN RESEARCH Psychologists must \
treat animals humanely. They must obey all relevant laws and regulations with regard to \
acquiring, caring for, and disposing of animals. They are obliged to supervise and accept \
responsibility for the handling of animals, and provide training for and ensure the \
competence of those who handle the animals. Psychologists must make efforts to minimize \
the discomfort and pain of animals. Animals are only to be subjected to pain or stress when \
an alternative procedure is unavailable and the study is justified in terms of its "prospective \
scientific, educational, or applied value." Appropriate anesthesia should be used when \
surgical procedures are performed. When an animal's life is to be terminated, it should be \
done rapidly and with an attempt to minimize pain. \
\
8.10 REPORTING RESEARCH RESULTS When reporting results, psychologists \
should never fabricate data. They must take reasonable steps to correct any errors that may \
occur in their published data. \
\
8.11 PLAGIARISM Plagiarism is strictly prohibited. \
\
8.12 PUBLICATION CREDIT    Publication credit should accurately reflect \
contributions to the research. A position like "Department Chair" does not qualify a person \
for publication credit unless the individual has made substantial contributions. Minor \
contributions should be acknowledged in a footnote or an introductory statement. The \
Ethics Code specifies that students should usually receive first authorship when their \
dissertations are published as articles. This standard does not apply to master's theses. \
Often, a master's thesis is completed as a part of a larger ongoing research project, and \
the student's contribution doesn't actually warrant first authorship. Issues of publication \
credit should be discussed with students as early as possible and throughout the publication \
process. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
8.13 DUPLICATE PUBLICATION OF DATA Previously published data should not \
be published in a manner that implies they are original data. \
\
8.14 SHARING RESEARCH DATA FOR VERIFICATION Psychologists should \
make their own data available to others who wish to replicate their results, assuming \
confidentiality and legal concerns are addressed. They may also require that the requesting \
party pay for any costs that are incurred in this process. Psychologists who request data for \
purposes of verification may not use the data for any other purpose unless they obtain \
explicit written permission for these other uses. \
\
8.15 REVIEWERS   When reviewing articles for publication or presentation, \
psychologists should respect confidentiality and proprietary rights. \
\
9. ASSESSMENT \
\
9.01 BASES FOR ASSESSMENTS Assessments, recommendations, and reports, \
including forensic testimony, should be based on techniques that are appropriate and \
sufficient. Forensic evaluations should normally include an examination of the person \
involved. If such an examination is not possible, psychologists must explicitly clarify what \
the effect will be on the validity of their reports and limit their conclusions accordingly. \
When psychologists are providing services that do not require a direct examination of the \
person, for example, record review or consultation, psychologists should explain this fact \
and the sources of information that they are using. \
\
9.02 USE OF ASSESSMENTS Assessment tools are to be used appropriately in light of \
relevant research. Assessment instruments should generally be used on populations for \
which they have demonstrated validity and reliability. Otherwise, the strengths and \
limitations of the results and interpretations should be described. Typically, assessment \
methods should be appropriate to the person's language preference and competence, unless \
the use of another language is relevant to the assessment's purpose. \
\
9.03 INFORMED CONSENT IN ASSESSMENTS Psychologists usually must secure \
informed consent prior to completing an assessment. There are three exceptions to this \
requirement: 1) when the testing is mandated by law or government regulations; 2) when \
the assessment is part of a routine educational or organizational activity and informed \
consent is implied (e.g., as part of applying for a job); and 3) when the testing is designed \
to assess decisional capacity. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
Informed consent to assessment generally includes information about the nature and \
purpose of the assessment, fees, third-party involvement, limits of confidentiality, as well \
as including an opportunity to have any questions answered. When persons have \
"questionable capacity to consent" or testing is mandated by law, psychologists use \
reasonably understandable language to explain the nature and purpose of the assessment. \
\
When an interpreter is used, this information must be included as part of informed consent. \
Psychologists must also ensure that confidentiality and test security are maintained. In their \
results, psychologists must discuss potential limitations of their data due to the use of an \
interpreter. \
\
9.04 RELEASE OF TEST DATA The Ethics Code defines test data as "raw and scaled \
scores, client/patient responses to test questions or stimuli, and psychologists' notes and \
recordings concerning client/patient statements and behavior during an examination." \
Psychologists should release test data to the client or to whomever is designated on a \
client's release of information form. From an ethical perspective, psychologists may refuse \
to release the data if they believe doing so would cause "substantial harm, or the misuse or \
misinterpretation of test data." However, as the Ethics Code notes, laws may nevertheless \
require that the data be released. If a client has not signed a release of information. \
psychologists may only release data if mandated by law or a court order. \
\
9.05 TEST CONSTRUCTION Psychologists who develop assessment instruments must \
ensure appropriate design, standardization, validation, and reduction of bias. \
\
9.06 INTERPRETING ASSESSMENT RESULTS Psychologists interpret assessment \
results in light of all relevant factors, including issues of culture and language. They should \
also indicate any limitations of their interpretations. \
\
9.07 ASSESSMENT BY UNQUALIFIED PERSONS   Psychologists should not \
promote the use of assessment by unqualified persons, unless it is in the context of an \
appropriate training program. \
\
9.08 OBSOLETE TESTS AND OUTDATED TEST RESULTS Psychologists should \
not base treatment or other decisions on obsolete test data or on obsolete measures. \
\
9.09 TEST SCORING AND INTERPRETATION SERVICES Psychologists retain \
ultimate responsibility for the use and interpretation of assessment instruments, regardless \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
of whether they score and interpret the tests themselves or whether they use interpretation \
services. \
\
9.10 EXPLAINING ASSESSMENT RESULTS    Psychologists should explain \
assessment results to clients. When the nature of the assessment situation precludes the \
sharing of results (e.g., security screenings, forensic examinations), the clients should be \
informed in advance that they will not receive the results. \
\
9.11 MAINTAINING TEST SECURITY Psychologists must make efforts to maintain \
test security. \
\
10. THERAPY \
\
10.01 INFORMED CONSENT TO THERAPY As part of the requirement of securing \
informed consent, psychologists should discuss with clients the nature and anticipated \
course of treatment, fees, involvement of third parties, and limits of confidentiality "as \
early as is feasible in the therapeutic relationship." They should also provide an opportunity \
for clients to have their questions answered. \
\
When treatment involves intervention techniques that have not yet been generally \
recognized or established, psychologists should inform their clients of this fact, as well as \
of any potential risks and possible alternative treatments. \
\
When trainees treat clients, the clients should be informed that the therapist is in training, \
that the case is being supervised, and they should be given the name of the supervisor who \
has legal responsibility for the case. \
\
10.02 THERAPY INVOLVING COUPLES OR FAMILIES When psychologists \
provide services to more than one person at a time (e.g., marital or family therapy), \
psychologists should clarify which of the individuals are clients and what relationship the \
psychologist will have with each person. If psychologists are asked to perform conflicting \
roles (e.g., marital therapist and witness for one party in a divorce), psychologists must \
"take reasonable steps to clarify and modify, or withdraw from, roles appropriately." \
\
10.03 GROUP THERAPY At the beginning of group therapy situations, psychologists \
should clarify the roles of the psychologists and the participants, as well as the limits of \
confidentiality. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
10.04 PROVIDING THERAPY TO THOSE SERVED BY OTHERS When clients \
are in treatment with other mental health providers, psychologists should carefully consider \
the treatment issues and the potential welfare of clients, discuss the issues with clients to \
minimize any confusion, consult with the other providers when appropriate, and proceed \
with caution and sensitivity. For example, it would be appropriate for a client to seek \
psychotherapy from a psychologist and medication services from a psychiatrist. However, \
if a client who is being treated by a psychologist is also being seen by another therapist for \
the same issues, the psychologist would need to discuss this matter with the client to clarify \
the need for two therapists. In addition, it would be necessary to consult with the other \
therapist to determine what would be in the best interests of the client. \
\
10.05 SEXUAL INTIMACIES WITH   CURRENT   THERAPY CLIENTS/ \
PATIENTS Psychologists may never engage in sex with current clients. \
\
10.06 SEXUAL INTIMACIES WITH RELATIVES OR SIGNIFICANT OTHERS \
OF CURRENT THERAPY CLIENTS/PATIENTS Psychologists may not have sexual \
relations with persons who are near to clients, including close relatives and significant \
others. In addition, psychologists may not terminate therapy with a client in order to engage \
in such a relationship. \
\
10.07 THERAPY WITH FORMER SEXUAL PARTNERS Psychologists may never \
treat previous sexual partners. \
\
10.08 SEXUAL INTIMACIES WITH FORMER THERAPY CLIENTS/ PATIENTS \
Psychologists may never have sex with a former client unless at least two years have passed \
since treatment ended. After this two-year interval, psychologists still should not enter into \
sexual relationships with former clients unless the "most unusual circumstances" exist. The \
burden remains on the psychologists to prove that there has been no exploitation, especially \
in light of seven factors: time passed since termination; the nature, intensity, and duration \
of treatment; circumstances of termination; personal history of the client; the client's \
current mental status; likelihood of adverse impact; and sexual statements made during \
treatment. \
\
10.09 INTERRUPTION OF THERAPY When psychologists enter into employment or \
contractual arrangements (e.g., managed care contracts), they take reasonable steps to \
ensure that responsibility for clients' care will be resolved appropriately when these \
contracts end. The welfare of the client should be the overriding consideration. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 3 - Ethics: Ten Ethical Standards \
\
10.10 TERMINATING THERAPY Psychologists should terminate therapy when it is \
reasonably clear that the client no longer needs, is not benefiting from, or is being harmed \
by treatment. It is ethically permissible to terminate therapy if the client, or someone in a \
relationship with the client, is threatening or endangering the psychologist. Termination \
should usually be preceded by pretermination counseling, which may include suggesting \
alternative treatment providers when appropriate. Exceptions to the requirement for \
pretermination counseling include situations in which actions of clients make it impossible \
(e.g., sudden refusal to attend therapy sessions) or when it is prohibited by third-party \
payors (e.g., managed care companies). \
\
\
 \
\
                                        Section 3 - Ethics: Tests and Testing \
\
            PROFESSIONAL ISSUES \
\
             3.5 TESTS AND TESTING \
\
>STANDARDS FOR EDUCATIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING (2014) \
The primary purpose of the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing is to \
"provide criteria for evaluating tests and testing practices." The Standards for Educational \
and Psychological Testing are divided into three parts: (1) foundations - validity, \
reliability, and test fairness; (2) operations - test development, administration, scoring, and \
reporting; and (3) applications - workplace testing, educational testing. use of tests in \
program evaluation, policy studies, and accountability. \
\
The Standards apply to standardized instruments as well as procedures for measuring a \
person's behavior including tests, assessments (e.g., formal performance assessments, \
hands-on assessments, and simulations), inventories, and scales. Based on recent \
developments in testing, the Standards especially highlight accountability issues (e.g., \
when tests are used in educational policy), accessibility of tests for all examinees, \
workplace testing, and testing and technology. \
\
>MENTAL MEASUREMENTS YEARBOOK (MMY) Buros' MMY series contains \
the most comprehensive and authoritative compilation of test reviews. Test reviews \
generally include a description of the test, and information about the uses of the test, test \
construction, administration and scoring, types of scores, normative data, reliability, \
validity, as well as any concerns. MMY reviews include evaluations of the meaning of the \
available research on each test. \
\
>TESTS IN PRINT Buros' Tests in Print is essentially a comprehensive bibliography \
of all known commercially available tests that are currently in print in the English language. \
It includes cross-referencing with the MMY. It lists information on each test, such as the \
title, the population it was designed for, available subtests, updating, authors, and \
publisher. \
\
\
\
                                         Section 3 - Ethics: APA Guidelines \
\
                3.6 APA GUIDELINES \
\
APA has published numerous guidelines. A partial list includes Guidelines for the Practice \
of Telepsychology (2013), Record Keeping Guidelines (2007), Guidelines for Child \
Custody Evaluations in Family Law Proceedings (2010), General Guidelines for Providers \
of Psychological Services (1987), Specialty Guidelines for Forensic Psychologists (2012), \
Guidelines for the Evaluation of Dementia and Cognitive Change (2012), and Guidelines \
for Psychological Practice with Lesbian, Gay, & Bisexual Clients (2011). \
\
In general, guidelines are suggestions or recommendations for professional behavior by \
psychologists. Guidelines differ from standards, which are mandatory and enforceable. \
Guidelines are aspirational in intent. \
\
Some noteworthy areas discussed in APA's various guidelines include the following: \
\
>GUIDELINES FOR THE PRACTICE OF TELEPSYCHOLOGY (2013) Three key \
issues were focused on in the development of the telepsychology guidelines: 1) \
psychologists competence in the use of technology and awareness of its potential impact; \
2) the need to ensure that patients have a full understanding of the risks related to possible \
loss of security and/or breaches of confidentiality; and 3) interjurisdictional practice. \
\
The telepsychology guidelines emphasize the importance of professional training and \
review of relevant literature, documenting choices regarding the use of telecommunication \
technologies, accessing of emergency resources in the patient's local area, informing \
patients of technology-related risks to confidentiality and obtaining informed consent, \
protecting and maintaining confidentiality, safe and appropriate disposal of data, unique \
issues with assessment when using telepsychology technology, and familiarity and \
compliance with laws and regulations when providing telepsychology across jurisdictions. \
\
>RECORD KEEPING GUIDELINES (2007) With regard to content of records, three \
kinds of information may be included: 1) general information such as identifying data, fees \
and billing information, documentation of consent, waivers of confidentiality, and \
mandated disclosures, presenting complaint, diagnosis, plan for services, history; 2) record \
of each client contact to include date of service, duration, type of service, assessment of \
client status; and 3) other specific information such as client reaction to interventions, risk \
factors, plans for future interventions, prognosis, and relevant cultural factors. \
\
\
 \
\
                                         Section 3 - Ethics: APA Guidelines \
\
In the absence of state regulations, APA's Record Keeping Guidelines (2007) state that \
psychologists may consider retaining a full set of records for adults for seven years after \
the last date of service delivery, and for minors psychologists may consider retaining a full \
set of records for either seven years or three years after the minor reaches the age of \
majority, whichever is later. In some cases, the records should ideally be maintained in \
perpetuity, for example, when a client has a disability documented during childhood (e.g., \
Autistic Disorder) and those records will continue to be needed throughout the person's \
lifetime (e.g., to receive Social Security benefits, etc.). \
\
>GUIDELINES FOR CHILD CUSTODY EVALUATIONS (2010) Divorce requires \
a restructuring of parental rights and responsibilities in relation to the children. If parents \
are unable to reach an agreement, then the courts intervene and apply the principle of the \
"best interests of the child" in determining the restructuring of rights and responsibilities. \
Child custody evaluations should focus on parenting attributes, the psychological and \
developmental needs of the child, and the resulting fit. The role of the psychologist is that \
of a professional expert who strives to maintain an impartial, objective stance, and the \
psychologist attempts to avoid conflicts of interest and multiple relationships in conducting \
evaluations. Thus, conducting a custody evaluation with a current or prior client or \
conducting therapy with a current or prior custody examinee should be avoided. \
\
The psychologist who is conducting the evaluation obtains informed consent from adults \
and assent from child participants, and informs participants that in consenting to an \
evaluation they are consenting to disclosure of the evaluation's findings in the forthcoming \
litigation or proceedings (i.e., there will be no confidentiality). The psychologist uses \
multiple methods of data gathering. \
\
In a child custody evaluation, the court typically expects the psychologist to examine both \
parents as well as the child. The psychologist may involve the court if needed to encourage \
all parties to participate in the custody evaluation. If an examination cannot be arranged, \
the psychologist clarifies the likely impact of the limited information on the reliability and \
validity of his or her opinions, and limits conclusions and recommendations appropriately. \
Not every child custody evaluation will result in recommendations (e.g., the data may not \
be sufficient). When recommendations are made, they are derived from sound \
psychological data. \
\
\
\
                                        Section 3 - Ethics: APA Guidelines \
\
>GENERAL   GUIDELINES FOR   PROVIDERS OF   PSYCHOLOGICAL \
SERVICES (1987) Providers of psychological services include professional \
psychologists. Professional psychologists have a doctoral degree in psychology from an \
organized, sequential program in a regionally accredited university or professional school. \
Recognized specialties include Clinical, Counseling, Industrial/Organizational, and School \
Psychology. \
\
Retraining psychologists to qualify them for a change in specialty must be under the \
auspices of a program in a regionally accredited university or professional school that \
offers the doctoral degree in that specialty. The education and training are individualized, \
with due credit given for relevant coursework or requirements previously satisfied. Merely \
taking an internship or acquiring experience in a practicum or employment setting is not \
adequate preparation to become a clinical, counseling, I/O, or school psychologist. \
\
\
 \
\
                                             Section 3 - Ethics: HIPAA \
\
 3.7 THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY \
     AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT (HIPAA) \
\
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) is a federal law that was \
signed into effect in 1996. HIPAA was designed to protect Americans with medical \
conditions from losing health insurance when they changed jobs or moved. \
\
The details of HIPAA compliance and its relationship to state laws is a very complex topic. \
 The following summary should not be used as a guide for a solo practitioner or institution \
to become compliant with HIPAA. \
\
>HIPAA'S THREE RULES HIPAA is comprised of three rules: the privacy rule, the \
transaction rule, and the security rule. \
\
     THE PRIVACY RULE The privacy rule of the Health Insurance Portability and \
     Accountability Act (HIPAA) became effective April 14, 2003. The privacy rule \
     provides regulations and safeguards regarding confidential patient information. \
     With the regard to telepsychology, practitioners are required to use HIPAA \
     complaint video services and secure messaging solutions to protect ePHI. \
     Communicating with patients using Skype, FaceTime, or email (e.g., gmail) is not \
     HIPAA complaint. \
\
     THE TRANSACTION RULE The transaction rule became effective October \
     16, 2003. The rule requires that a nationally standardized format be used for all \
     health-care transactions that are transmitted electronically, most notably all \
     insurance claims. Practitioners who submit claims electronically must therefore \
     either use appropriate software or contract with a health-care clearinghouse. (A \
     clearinghouse accepts written data, transforms it into electronic data, and then \
     transmits it to the insurance company). \
\
     THE SECURITY RULE The security rule became effective April 20, 2005. The \
     security rule addresses issues of physical security, such as locking filing cabinets \
     and encrypting emails. \
\
 >HIPAA COMPLIANCE Technically, compliance with HIPAA's rules is only required \
 when health information is transmitted in some electronic form. However, once any \
\
 \
\
                                            Section 3 - Ethics: HIPAA \
\
information is transmitted electronically, HIPAA's rules apply to the entire practice of a \
 psychologist or an institution. Thus, except for the rare private practice practitioner who \
does not accept third-party reimbursement or use electronic transmissions, HIPAA applies \
to all psychologists. \
\
>HIPAA AND STATE LAW Issues about confidentiality and patient access to records \
are typically governed by state laws and regulations. However, HIPAA is a federal law that \
can take precedence over state law. Specifically, when HIPAA is stricter, it supersedes \
state law. In contrast, when state law is stricter. it supersedes HIPAA. When state law and \
HIPAA are contradictory, making it impossible to comply with both, the practitioner must \
 follow HIPAA. \
\
>HIPAA AND FERPA HIPAA has no jurisdiction over educational records. Privacy \
rights in educational records are governed by the 1974 Family Educational Rights and \
Privacy Act (FERPA), also known as the Buckley Amendment. The Buckley Amendment \
protects the privacy of student records in higher education institutions (e.g., college). It \
includes provisions granting the right of access to one's own records as well as limiting the \
disclosure of the records, such that parents cannot access these records (including student \
health records) without student consent. \
\
>PENALTIES Penalties for failure to comply with HIPAA include: 1) administrative \
sanction by the Office for Civil Rights of Health and Human Services (the promulgators \
of HIPAA); 2) civil penalties of $100 for each violation up to a total of $25,000 a year; and \
 3) fines of up to $250,000 or ten year imprisonment, or both, for deliberate and knowing \
violations of patients' privacy rights. \
\
>BASIC DEFINITIONS HIPAA distinguishes between protected health information \
(PHI) and psychotherapy notes. Most of HIPAA's general provisions govern protected \
health information (PHI). There are more stringent protections for psychotherapy notes. \
\
     PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION (PHI) PHI refers to health \
     information that identifies a patient, and that is transmitted or maintained in any \
     form (e.g., on computer, handwritten notes, etc.). PHI includes information about \
     the mental health condition of a patient (e.g., diagnosis, symptoms, prognosis, \
     progress), the provision of services (e.g., medication, treatment modality, treatment \
     plan, frequency of treatment), and payments. Typically, chart notes kept on a \
     psychotherapy patient are considered to be PHI. \
\
 \
 \
\
                                            Section 3 - Ethics: HIPAA \
\
     PSYCHOTHERAPY NOTES Psychotherapy notes refer to "process notes." Very \
     few psychologists make process notes. Process notes are notes that document or \
     analyze the content of counseling sessions (e.g., dreams, transference). In order for \
     process notes to be considered "psychotherapy notes" and to be accorded special \
     protection, HIPAA requires that these notes be "separated from the rest of an \
     individual's medical record." This means that psychotherapy notes must be kept \
     physically separate from the general medical record (or patient chart). \
\
>GENERALIZED CONSENT AND AUTHORIZATION HIPAA distinguishes \
between generalized consent and authorization. \
\
     GENERALIZED CONSENT Patients must be informed of a practitioner's \
     privacy policy (e.g., given paperwork describing the privacy policy). However, \
     they do not have to give written consent. HIPAA allows for the disclosures of PHI \
     for the purposes of treatment, payment, or to carry out health care operations. In \
     other words, by law, psychologists, medical doctors, and hospitals may disclose \
     and use PHI without a patient's consent if they are doing so for treatment (e.g., a \
     consultation), payment (e.g., billing an insurance company), or health care \
     operations (e.g., utilization review). Although patient consent is technically not \
     needed in these three disclosure situations, it is still considered the standard of \
     practice for psychologists to obtain written permission from patients for any \
     disclosures of confidential information. \
\
     AUTHORIZATION Authorization refers to obtaining patient permission to \
     disclose information on a release of information form. According to HIPAA, a \
     practitioner does not need to obtain authorization (i.e., written releases) for \
     disclosures, as long as any of the disclosures are for the purposes of treatment. \
     payment, or health care operations (as these are covered under generalized consent). \
     However, an authorization is needed for any other type of disclosure. For example, \
     if a patient's employer, a spouse, a school, or the court requests PHI, an \
     authorization from the patient must be secured. Psychologists do not need a patient \
     authorization for mandated disclosures (e.g., Tarasoff, child abuse). \
\
     Psychotherapy notes are recognized as a special class of information with special \
     protections. According to HIPAA, managed care organizations and other third- \
     party reimbursement entities may not require the release of psychotherapy notes to \
     provide reimbursement. To disclose psychotherapy notes to anyone, the patient \
     must complete a specific and detailed authorization. There are of course a few \
\
\
\
                                            Section 3 - Ethics: HIPAA \
\
     exceptions, such as to avert a serious threat to the health and safety of a person, or \
     when required by law. \
\
>A SUMMARY OF PATIENTS' RIGHTS Under HIPAA, patients in many states have \
greater access to their records, as well as increased understanding of how their records will \
be used. What follows are six basic patients' rights. \
\
     RIGHT OF NOTICE Patients have the right to be informed about the \
     psychologist's privacy policy and the ways in which personal health information \
     may be used or disclosed, as well as patients' rights to limit uses and disclosures. \
     Patients should be provided with a written copy of the psychologist's privacy \
     policy. \
\
     RIGHT TO REQUEST RESTRICTIONS Psychologists are obligated to agree \
     to reasonable requests to restrict use and disclosure of PHI. Psychologists are not \
     obligated to agree to any and all limits on disclosure and use that are requested by \
     patients. \
\
     RIGHT TO RECEIVE   CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS   BY \
     ALTERNATIVE MEANS AND AT ALTERNATIVE LOCATIONS Patients \
     may elect to have psychologists mail their bills to an address other than their home \
     address or not to call them at their home phone in order to protect patients' \
     confidentiality. \
\
     ACCESS TO RECORDS Patients have the right to inspect and receive a copy of \
     personal health information (PHI) that is in the medical record. Records may only \
     be withheld when disclosure would jeopardize the life or physical safety of the \
     patient or others. \
\
     RIGHT OF AMENDMENT Patients may request changes to their PHI to improve \
     accuracy. If a psychologist determines that such a change would make the PHI less \
     accurate, the request may be denied. The record may never be expunged (i.e., \
     inaccurate information deleted and replaced with accurate information). Instead, \
     changes to the record should be noted as amendments. All requests for amendment, \
     as well as whether the requests were granted or denied, must be documented. \
\
     RIGHT OF ACCOUNTING Patients have the right to receive an accounting of \
     all the disclosures of their PHI for the past six years. This accounting must include \
     information about the date of the disclosure, the party to whom the information was \
\
\
 \
\
                                              Section 3 - Ethics: HIPAA \
\
       disclosed, and a description of what was disclosed and for what purpose. Written \
       authorizations by the patient may be used in lieu of such an accounting procedure. \
\
  >DUTIES OF THE PSYCHOLOGIST HIPAA compliance is "scalable," meaning more \
  is expected of a hospital than of a private practitioner. Nevertheless, the following practices \
  apply to all providers who need to be HIPAA compliant. \
\
       WRITTEN PRIVACY POLICY Psychologists must have a written privacy \
       policy, and this privacy policy must be given to all patients. This policy must reflect \
       compliance with HIPAA and state laws. A HIPAA compliance officer must be \
       designated; in most small practices this would be the practitioner him or herself. \
\
       TRACKING DISCLOSURES Psychologists must track disclosures of protected \
       health information. \
\
       COMPLIANCE OF   EMPLOYEES   AND BUSINESS ASSOCIATES \
       Psychologists must ensure that employees (e.g., psychological assistants, \
       secretaries) are trained and compliant with HIPAA requirements. Psychologists \
       must obtain contractual assurances that business associates (e.g., billing companies) \
       comply with HIPAA. \
\
       PROTECTION FOR PSYCHOTHERAPY NOTES    If psychologists want \
       psychotherapy notes to receive more stringent protections, they must maintain these \
       notes separately from the rest of the medical record. \
\
       SAFEGUARDING ACCESS TO PHI Access to PHI must be safeguarded. \
       Practitioners must take appropriate and reasonable actions such as locking filing \
       cabinets, ensuring that electronic records are protected with passwords and \
       firewalls (inexpensive software that prevents computers from being hacked into), \
       and encrypting emails that contain PHI (already contained in many software \
       programs). \
\
  \
\
                     \
\
INDUSTRIAL/ORGANIZATIONAL \
\
                PSYCHOLOGY \
\
                         SECTION 4 \
\
                       PsychPrep \
                       PASS EFFICIENTLY \
 \
\
                     SECTION 4: \
      INDUSTRIAL/ORGANIZATIONAL \
                   PSYCHOLOGY \
\
                    4.1 OVERVIEW \
\
I. LEGAL ISSUES \
\
Industrial/Organizational psychology is affected by several legal issues or acts. \
\
>TITLE VII OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 Title VII is the original Equal \
Employment Opportunity (EEO) Act. It states that one cannot discriminate on the basis of \
sex, ethnicity, and a variety of other factors. \
\
>UNIFORM GUIDELINES ON EMPLOYEE SELECTION    In 1978, the Equal \
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) created the Uniform Guidelines on \
Employee Selection. According to these guidelines, the use of any test that adversely \
affects hiring, promotion, or other selection procedures, constitutes discrimination. The use \
of such a test may still be acceptable, however, if the test is validated, has utility, and no \
alternatives are available. \
\
>AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT The Americans with Disabilities Act \
(1990) bans discrimination in employment, transportation, access to public buildings, as \
well as discrimination in other settings. It also requires that companies make reasonable \
accommodations for disabled individuals. \
\
A "qualified individual with disability" is one who can perform the essential functions of \
the employment position with or without reasonable accommodation. "Reasonable \
accommodation" is defined as making existing facilities readily accessible to and usable \
by individuals with disabilities, and includes such things as job restructuring, modified \
work schedules, adjustment or modification of exams, and acquisition or modification of \
equipment. \
\
\
\
                                   Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Overview \
\
The ADA states that discrimination includes using standards, employment tests or other \
selection criteria that screen out an individual with a disability or class of individuals with \
disabilities, unless the test or criteria is shown to be job-related and consistent with business \
necessity. \
\
With regard to substance abuse, the ADA prohibits discrimination against someone who \
has successfully completed or is currently participating in a drug rehabilitation program \
and is no longer using drugs. The act explicitly takes no stand for or against drug testing. \
stating "nothing in this title shall be construed to encourage, prohibit or authorize the \
conducting of drug testing for the illegal use of drugs by job applicants or employees or \
making employment decisions based on such test results." \
\
>GRIGGS VERSUS DUKE POWER COMPANY (1971)   This landmark I/O case \
affected the issue of testing at the workplace. The court ruled that tests that measured broad \
abilities, in which minority group members passed at much lower rates than Whites, were \
unfair to use to make decisions of hiring and promotion. Thus broad general testing was \
faulted, and a requirement was established that tests measure skills necessary for a \
particular job. \
\
II. DISCRIMINATION \
\
There are three major problems that can result in discrimination. These problems can affect \
hiring, evaluation, and promotion. Any combination of these problems can occur (e.g., all \
three can be present or only one might be present). \
\
>ADVERSE IMPACT   Adverse impact is based on the 80% or 4/5ths rule, which \
basically states that the percentage of minorities selected must be at least 4/5ths of the \
percentage of non-minorities selected. This is not the same as saying that one must select \
4/5ths as many minorities as non-minorities. The easiest way to calculate the minimum \
acceptable requirement for selection is to multiply the selection rate for non-minorities by \
.8. For example, a group of applicants seek admission to medical school. If out of one \
hundred non-minority applicants, twenty are selected, the selection ratio is 20/100 or 20%. \
Multiplying .20 by .80 results in .16. So, the minimum acceptable rate for the selection of \
minority applicants would be 16% (e.g., if there are fifty minority applicants, a minimum \
of eight would need to be admitted). \
\
>UNFAIRNESS Unfairness occurs when minorities and non-minorities score differently \
on the predictor test yet perform similarly on the criterion. Graphically, unfairness is \
\
\
 \
\
                                  Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Overview \
\
depicted as two parallel lines (each line represents a different regression equation used to \
predict performance on the criterion based on the predictor test score). Some theorists argue \
that unfairness rarely occurs. \
\
The MCAT exam is sometimes offered as an example of unfairness, The MCAT attempts \
to predict success in medical school. Some argue that minorities routinely score lower on \
the MCAT than do non-minorities. However, once in medical school, minorities perform \
just as well as their non-minority counterparts. In other words, minorities score differently \
on the predictor (the MCAT) but perform similarly on the criterion (medical school), a \
situation that exemplifies "unfairness." \
\
>DIFFERENTIAL VALIDITY Differential validity occurs when there are significantly \
different criterion-related validity coefficients for different groups on the same test. Put \
more simply, differential validity means that the test is more valid for predicting the \
performance of one group (e.g., males vs. females, Whites vs. Non-Whites) than it is for \
predicting the performance of another. For example, differential validity would exist if the \
MCAT has a criterion-related validity coefficient of .45 for Whites and .25 for Hispanics. \
In this instance, the MCAT would be a far better predictor of success in medical school for \
Whites than for Hispanics. Research suggests that differential validity actually rarely \
occurs. Previous findings in the literature of problems with differential validity are now \
believed to have resulted from low sample size. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
             4.2 HUMAN RESOURCES \
\
Development of human resources focuses on techniques for employee selection, use of \
psychological tests, performance appraisals, training and development, and career \
development theories. \
\
A critical procedure in I/O that affects hiring or promotion is the job analysis. A job \
analysis describes in specific terms the nature of the component tasks performed by \
workers on a particular job. A job analysis includes information about the tools or \
equipment used, the operations performed, education and training required, wages paid, \
and any unique aspect of the job such as safety hazards. To reiterate, a job analysis is a \
procedure for the collection and analysis of data that provides information about the job \
tasks (known as a job description) and job requirements (known as job specifications). A \
job analysis provides the data necessary for many other essential employment-related tasks. \
such as validating selection procedures, determining wages, ascertaining training needs, \
and so forth. It is also associated with a job evaluation, a formal process that determines \
the financial worth of a specific job to an organization. \
\
Job analysis is particularly crucial in order to comply with EEO guidelines regarding fair \
employment. These guidelines require that all employment procedures (e.g., hiring, \
promotions, and evaluations) be based on criteria that are "job-related." Such criteria can \
best be developed with the detailed information provided by a job analysis. \
\
Data for a job analysis can be obtained through either open-ended or structured interviews. \
Data can also be obtained through the critical incident technique. The critical incident \
technique involves ascertaining the specific actions that lead to desirable (successful) or \
undesirable (unsuccessful) consequences on the job. In the example of a customer service \
representative, actions with desirable consequences would include greeting customers in a \
pleasant and professional manner, while actions with undesirable consequences would \
include neglecting to follow through on customer complaints. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
I. EMPLOYEE SELECTION \
\
Selection and screening options include biodata, interviews, tests, assessment centers, and \
references and letters of recommendation. \
\
A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION (BIODATA) \
\
Biographical information includes three major techniques: the standard application blank, \
the weighted application blank and the biographical inventory. \
\
>THE STANDARD APPLICATION   The standard application blank is the most \
common type of application. It asks for personal data, including education, employment \
history, etc. \
\
>THE WEIGHTED APPLICATION BLANK    The weighted application blank is \
similar to the standard application in form and content. However, it assigns weights to \
certain variables (e.g., college versus non-college graduates) that then affect the hiring \
process. \
\
>THE BIOGRAPHICAL INVENTORY The biographical inventory, sometimes called \
the BIB (biographical information blank), typically covers the applicant's life in greater \
detail. Questions selected for the BIB are correlated with desirable and undesirable work \
behaviors, and are validated against a specific criterion (e.g., successful work \
performance). BIBs are very good predictors of job success (.32 - . 46 criterion related \
validity coefficients) and they are also good predictors of turnover. They are only used by \
about 7% of American companies because their development can be time-consuming and \
potentially costly, given that they need to be tailored to the specific work behaviors of the \
position. \
\
B. INTERVIEWS \
\
Interviews have the worst criterion-related validity (.10 -. 19). They are better if structured, \
if there are multiple interviewers, and if interviewers are trained. When unstructured, there \
is a high degree of disagreement among interviewers. Furthermore, there are significant \
difficulties with predictive accuracy. \
\
Interviewer biases include first impression, negative information, the contrast effect, \
interviewer prejudices, and the halo effect. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
>FIRST IMPRESSION First impression bias refers to the tendency of the interviewer \
to be swayed by an initial impression of the candidate and to overlook the candidate's \
presentation throughout the remainder of the interview. \
\
>NEGATIVE INFORMATION   Negative information bias refers to the tendency for \
one or two negative items to cause the interviewer to overlook strengths or \
accomplishments. \
\
>THE CONTRAST EFFECT The contrast effect occurs when an interviewer's ratings \
of a candidate are affected by the performance of the previous candidate (e.g., a mediocre \
candidate gets rated more highly because the previous candidate was extremely poor). \
\
>INTERVIEWER PREJUDICES Interviewer prejudices include the personal likes, \
dislikes, and beliefs of the interviewer that bias his or her view of the candidate. \
\
>THE HALO EFFECT The halo effect involves generalizing from one characteristic to \
the entire candidate in either a positive or negative direction. A commonly occurring halo \
effect relates to attractiveness, in that attractive individuals are frequently seen as \
competent, effective, and trustworthy, while unattractive individuals are ascribed with \
many negative qualities. \
\
C. TESTS \
\
>COGNITIVE ABILITY TESTS Tests of cognitive ability (e.g., the Wonderlic \
Personnel Test) and aptitude (e.g., typing tests) are very commonly used and tend to be \
quite good predictors of job success. However, one problem with such tests is that they \
may result in discrimination (see section above on Griggs vs. Duke Power Company). \
\
>PERSONALITY TESTS Personality tests are poor predictors of job performance. \
\
>INTEREST TESTS Interest tests (e.g., Holland's Self-Directed Search) are poor \
predictors of job success but they do correlate with job satisfaction. \
\
>WORK SAMPLE TESTS On work sample tests, candidates demonstrate sample work \
behavior. For example, an applicant for a secretarial position is asked to type a memo, or \
someone wanting to work as a chef at McDonald's cooks a burger. Work samples have \
both high content and criterion-related validity, and, in comparison with other types of \
testing, they tend to be more valid for minorities. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
>TEST BATTERIES Test batteries are almost exclusively used in upper management \
and are good predictors of job performance. \
\
D. ASSESSMENT CENTERS \
\
The Assessment Center is a method of selection that places new job applicants and \
candidates for promotion in a simulated job situation so that their behaviors under stress \
can be observed or evaluated. This approach, also called situational testing, was first used \
by the German army in the 1920s. This approach involves work samples. Assessment \
centers have very good criterion-related validity. \
\
Assessment centers usually involve six to twelve candidates at a time, evaluated as they \
work through a series of exercises over several days. Candidates are interviewed \
extensively. They may be given intelligence and personality tests, but most of the time is \
devoted to exercises that simulate the actual problems of high-level work. The major \
techniques include the in-basket technique and leaderless group discussion. \
\
>THE IN-BASKET TECHNIQUE The in-basket technique presents applicants with \
typical problems and questions that managers would expect to find when they return from \
a vacation. Applicants process this information in a fixed period of time, and after the \
exercise they may be required to justify their decisions. \
\
>THE LEADERLESS GROUP DISCUSSION   In the leaderless group discussion, \
applicants meet as a group to discuss an actual business problem. As the candidates interact \
with each other, their leadership qualities and communication styles are observed. \
\
E. REFERENCES AND LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION \
\
References and letters of recommendation are often misleading because candidates tend to \
seek them from those who will give them favorable reviews. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
F. SELECTION PROCEDURES \
\
Often, many sources of information are included in the selection process. For example, \
college admissions offices often consider high school GPA, SAT scores, interviews, and \
letters of reference. There are three different techniques that can be used to make decisions \
based on multiple criteria. \
\
>MULTIPLE REGRESSION APPROACH This approach is a compensatory \
technique, in which low scores on one predictor can be compensated for by high scores on \
another predictor. For example, an applicant with a low GPA (e.g., 2.5) may still be \
considered for admission if the SAT scores are very high (e.g., over 1400) and the interview \
went well. This approach requires computing a multiple regression equation (see Statistics \
section). \
\
>MULTIPLE CUTOFF This approach is noncompensatory. Here, only applicants who \
meet or exceed the cutoff on each of the predictors will be considered. For example, the \
college will only consider applicants with a GPA of at least 3.0, an SAT score of at least \
1400, and a successful interview. If the GPA is 2.9, it doesn't matter how high the SAT \
score is; that applicant will not be considered. \
\
>MULTIPLE HURDLE This approach is also noncompensatory. The predictors are \
applied in a particular order, and an applicant must pass the cutoff score on the first \
predictor in order to continue in the selection process. For example, only applicants with \
GPAs above 3.0 continue on to have their SAT scores analyzed. Then, only applicants with \
SAT scores above 1400 are granted an interview. This technique is efficient because all \
applicants are given the inexpensive selection techniques (i.e., GPA and SAT scores are \
analyzed), while only a few are given the more expensive technique (i.e., the interview). \
\
II. PERFORMANCE \
\
Performance is believed to be a function of ability, motivation, and opportunity. \
\
Ability refers to innate capacities as well as individual attributes (e.g., gender). Researchers \
have found no differences in overall abilities between men and women. However, women \
tend to have lower expectations of success. \
\
Motivation is reflected by the person's willingness to perform and can be measured by \
work effort. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
Opportunity is thought to be related to environmental variables, including organizational \
support. \
\
A. PERFORMANCE APPRAISALS \
\
Performance appraisals are useful for a variety of tasks, including: decisions about salary, \
promotion, and bonus; identification of employees' strengths and weaknesses; provision \
of feedback to employees; validation of selection criteria; and determination of training \
requirements. \
\
Performance appraisals can be objective, subjective, or focused on results rather than merit \
(e.g., MBO). \
\
A1. OBJECTIVE METHODS \
\
Objective methods of performance evaluation include easily observable and quantifiable \
categories, such as quantity of output, quality of output (number of errors), accidents, \
absenteeism, etc. \
\
A2. SUBJECTIVE METHODS \
\
Subjective methods of evaluation include ratings by supervisors, peers, subordinates, or \
even self-ratings. Ratings can be either comparative (one employee's performance is \
compared with other employees'), or individual/absolute. \
\
>COMPARATIVE METHODS \
\
     STRAIGHT RANKINGS Straight rankings involve listing workers from best to \
     worst. \
\
     FORCED DISTRIBUTION In a forced distribution, people are ranked to fit a \
     distribution, e.g., a few at the top and bottom with most in the middle. \
\
     PAIRED COMPARISON In the paired comparison method, each employee is \
     compared to every other employee in pairs. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
>INDIVIDUAL (ABSOLUTE) METHODS \
\
     GRAPHIC RATING SCALES Graphic rating scales involve ratings on several \
    aspects of a job. For example, a variety of job dimensions (such as work quantity, \
     punctuality, etc.) are assessed on a likert scale. \
\
     BARS (BEHAVIORALLY ANCHORED RATING SCALES)    In BARS, \
     behavioral anchors are based on critical incidents. For example, employees are \
     rated on various aspects of the job, aspects that have been linked to successful job \
     performance. Problems associated with BARS include that scale development is \
     expensive and time-consuming, and that these scales do not tend to measure actual \
     day-to-day activities, but rather hypothetical situations. \
\
     BOS (BEHAVIORAL OBSERVATION SCALE) BOS involves rating the \
     extent to which a person engages in every behavior (e.g., how often the employee \
     finishes projects on time). \
\
     FORCED CHOICE In the forced choice method, the rater must choose between \
    two seemingly equally desirable or undesirable choices (e.g., is reliable/is \
     agreeable, or is headstrong/is slow). This method controls for the halo effect, as \
     well as biases due to leniency and strictness. \
\
     BEHAVIORAL CHECKLIST A rater using a behavioral checklist checks off \
     all the adjectives or descriptors that apply to the employee being rated. \
\
A3. MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES (MBO) \
\
MBO involves a mutual agreement between employees and supervisors on goals to be \
achieved in a given time. This process actively involves employees in their own \
evaluations. MBO consists of two phases: goal setting and performance review. MBO has \
been found to be effective in increasing motivation and productivity, with a meta-analysis \
showing an average gain of 44.6% (Rodgers & Hunter, 1991). \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
B. ERRORS IN EVALUATION \
\
Although errors in evaluation come from both instrument errors and rater errors, rater \
errors account for the more significant problem. \
\
B1. INSTRUMENT ERRORS \
\
Instrument errors include deficiency errors and contamination errors. \
\
     DEFICIENCY ERRORS Deficiency errors involve excluding important aspects \
     of the job from evaluations. \
\
     CONTAMINATION ERRORS     Contamination errors refer to rating an \
     employee on non-important aspects of the job. \
\
B2. RATER ERRORS \
\
Rater errors include task-based rater biases and ratee-based biases. \
\
>TASK-BASED RATER BIASES These types of errors occur when the rater adopts an \
evaluative set based on the task. Examples include strictness set, leniency set, and central \
tendency set. \
\
     STRICTNESS SET With a strictness set, the rater is overly strict and gives \
     everyone low ratings. \
\
     LENIENCY SET With a leniency set, the rater is overly lenient and gives \
     everyone high ratings. \
\
     CENTRAL TENDENCY SET With a central tendency set, the rater tends to rate \
     everyone as about average. \
\
>RATEE-BASED BIASES Ratee-based biases include the halo error and personal \
biases. \
\
     THE HALO ERROR The halo error occurs when the employee's performance \
     rating is based on one positive or negative aspect of the individual, e.g., style of \
     dress. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
     PERSONAL BIASES   Personal biases, such as prejudices against certain \
     ethnicities, can influence the evaluation of employees. These biases are particularly \
     significant since EEOC guidelines apply not only to issues of hiring but also to \
     promotions, layoffs, and many of the decisions that stem from employee \
     evaluations. \
\
     Some research found that supervisors tend to rate persons of their own race more \
     favorably (Schmitt and Lappin, 1980). In contrast, another study found that both \
     Black and White raters gave lower performance appraisals to black workers than to \
     White workers (Sackett and DuBois, 1991). Sex biases in appraisal also occur, with \
     one study finding that women's ratings were lower when they constituted less than \
     20% of a work group, but higher when they constituted more than 50% of the work \
     group. Finally, age biases occur too, with older workers tending to be rated lower \
     on interpersonal skills and overall job performance. \
\
>OTHER SOURCES OF ERROR \
\
     RECENCY BIASES The recency bias refers to the tendency of an evaluator to be \
    most influenced by an employee's recent behaviors (e.g., evaluates the employee \
     only on the behavior of the last month even though it's a yearly evaluation). \
\
     ATTRIBUTION ERRORS Attribution errors refer to the tendency of supervisors \
     to attribute poor performance to internal factors for workers they don't like, and to \
     external factors for workers they do like. \
\
     OTHER Another source of error is that supervisors tend to rate employees higher \
     when the supervisor participated in the hiring decision. \
\
>STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE RATINGS   Strategies to improve ratings include \
training raters with the instruments to be used, using multiple raters, having raters rate on \
an ongoing basis rather than once or twice a year, and basing performance on clear and \
specific performance standards obtained through a job analysis. \
\
Frame of reference (FOR) training is a particularly successful strategy for reducing rater \
error. In FOR training, raters are provided with clear and specific criteria (i.e., references) \
for what constitutes the different levels of performance (e.g., outstanding, good, average, \
etc.). An example may also be provided for each level. In this manner, all the raters acquire \
a common understanding of what constitutes acceptable or unacceptable performance on \
each job dimension. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
III. TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT \
\
This section describes different types of training approaches, as well as the most significant \
factors that affect training. \
\
A. TYPES OF TRAINING \
\
Training can be provided on the job, on-site, or off the job. The most common types of \
instructional methods include non-participative training, individual participative training. \
and group participative training. \
\
>NON-PARTICIPATIVE TRAINING In non-participative training, the trainee is a \
passive recipient. Examples include watching a training video or listening to a lecture. \
\
>INDIVIDUAL PARTICIPATIVE TRAINING \
\
     PROGRAMMED INSTRUCTION     Programmed instruction makes use of \
     booklets, interactive videotapes, and complex computer software. It involves \
     graduated presentation of material with feedback at each step. The training \
     approach commonly involves self-instruction. Examples include programmed \
     instructions for bank tellers, tax analysts, and insurance salespeople. Programmed \
     instruction is usually restricted to programs that attempt to train a large number of \
    trainees in a short period of time. \
\
     COMPUTER   ASSISTED INSTRUCTION (CAI)   Computer assisted \
    instruction, sometimes called computer based training (CBT), is a derivative of \
    programmed instruction. The instruction is computer based. An example is \
    programs available that teach computer literacy on the computer. \
\
     SIMULATION TRAINING Simulation training, also called vestibule training, \
    involves training in an environment that simulates the actual job. For example, \
     pilots are initially trained in simulated cockpits. Simulation training is costly, but \
    used when necessary. \
\
     JOB ROTATION Job rotation involves exposing trainees (usually managers) to \
     different jobs and departments to acquaint them with all facets of the organization. \
    This is typical of Japanese companies. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
>GROUP PARTICIPATIVE TRAINING   Group participative training includes \
discussion, role-playing, business games, sensitivity training, in-basket training, and \
behavioral modeling. \
\
B. PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING TRAINING \
\
>INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES Individual differences in ability to be trained can be \
predicted through cognitive tests, biographical data, attitude measures, and work samples. \
Overall, training does not always equalize differences in ability; it may actually magnify \
them. \
\
>PRE-TRAINING EXPECTATIONS The expectations of the individuals being trained \
also affect training success. Individuals with a low sense of self-efficacy are less receptive \
than those with a high sense of self-efficacy. \
\
>MOTIVATION   Trainees with higher levels of motivation learn more and are more \
likely to complete programs. Trainees' motivation can be increased by involving them in \
decisions about the training program, allowing them to participate in a needs assessment, \
and giving them a choice of training courses. Motivation is affected by one's sense of job \
involvement and by locus of control. \
\
>ACTIVE VERSUS PASSIVE PRACTICE Trainees learn the most when they are \
actively involved in the process. \
\
>MASSED VERSUS DISTRIBUTED (SPACED) PRACTICE   Massed practice \
involves providing all the training in a short time period (e.g., in one day), while spaced \
practice refers to training conducted over several sessions. In general, spaced practice is \
better for learning. \
\
>WHOLE AND PART LEARNING Whole learning describes presenting the material \
all at once, while part learning involves presenting the material in smaller units. Slower \
learners may be better able to master new material when it is presented in smaller units. \
\
>TRANSFER OF TRAINING Transfer of training refers to the application of the \
training material to the work setting. Two strategies to enhance transfer of training include \
overlearning and identical elements. The goal of overlearning is to develop very thorough \
knowledge of a task. It is particularly useful for tasks that are infrequently performed, as \
well as for those performed under conditions of stress. Identical elements refer to \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
similarity between the training situation (e.g., concepts covered, the skills learned) and the \
actual work situation. \
\
>FEEDBACK People learn best with feedback. Feedback should be offered as soon as \
possible. Training is better when the program allows for frequent feedback. \
\
>REINFORCEMENT   Reinforcement affects the speed of learning. The greater the \
reward, the more rapidly the behavior will be learned. Initially, continuous (and immediate) \
reinforcement should be given; later on, the schedule can be thinned. \
\
IV. CAREER DEVELOPMENT THEORIES \
\
Career development theories are broadly grouped into two categories: structural and \
developmental. Structural theories focus on individual traits and occupational tasks (e.g., \
Holland's theory), while developmental theories focus on development across the life span \
(e.g., Super's theory). \
\
A. HOLLAND'S PERSONALITY-JOB FIT THEORY \
\
The major assumption of John Holland's theory is that individuals and job traits can be \
matched, and that close matches will correlate with job success and satisfaction. Holland's \
formula for successful career planning involves knowing one's self (abilities, interests and \
occupational choices), and having information about the world of work (occupational \
profiles, job descriptions, and traits that exist within given occupational roles). \
\
A1. HOLLAND'S TYPOLOGY \
\
Holland classified both personality types as well as work environments into six types, \
which he labeled realistic, investigative, artistic, social, enterprising and conventional \
(RIASEC). On Holland's Self-Directed Search, each person receives a code with the letters \
that represent his or her personality (e.g., RI standing for realistic and investigative). A \
person can receive up to three letter codes, with the first letter representing the dominant \
personality type. \
\
>REALISTIC The realistic type prefers physical activities that require skill, strength and \
coordination. Jobs in this domain include mechanic, drill press operator, or farmer. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
>INVESTIGATIVE The investigative type prefers activities that involve thinking. \
organizing, and understanding. Jobs in this category include biologist, economist or news \
reporter. \
\
>ARTISTIC The artistic type prefers ambiguous and unsystematic activities that allow \
creative expression. Jobs in this domain include painter, musician, or writer. \
\
>SOCIAL The social type prefers activities that involve helping and developing others. \
Jobs in this domain include social worker, teacher, and clinical psychologist. \
\
>ENTERPRISING The enterprising type prefers activities with opportunity to influence \
others and obtain power. Jobs in this category include lawyer, real estate agent, or small \
business manager. \
\
>CONVENTIONAL   The conventional type prefers rule-regulated, orderly, and \
unambiguous activities. Jobs in this domain include accountant, bank teller, or file clerk. \
\
These themes can be organized in the shape of a hexagon. Adjacent themes are most \
similar, while those directly across are most dissimilar. \
\
A2. KEY CONCEPTS \
\
Holland developed several other concepts that pertain to the hexagon. \
\
>CONGRUENCE Congruence refers to the degree of match between the personality type \
and the work environment. The closer the work environment and the personality type are \
on the hexagon, the higher the degree of congruence. For example, someone with an artistic \
personality working as an artist would have a high degree of congruence. Someone with \
an artistic personality working as a drill press operator would have low congruence. A high \
level of congruence correlates with longevity at the job. \
\
>CONSISTENCY Consistency refers to how closely related an individual's first two code \
letters are on the hexagon. For example, the code AS (artistic, social) would have a high \
degree of consistency because the code letters are next to each other on the hexagon. In \
contrast, the code IE (investigative, enterprising) would have low consistency because the \
two code letters are opposite each other on the hexagon. The higher the consistency of an \
individual's code, the more likely the person will exhibit stability in work history. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
>DIFFERENTIATION Differentiation refers to the distinctness of a profile. The more \
an individual is represented by one personality type, the more distinct the profile is. An \
individual who resembles all six types would have an undifferentiated profile. It is easiest \
to predict the behavior of individuals with highly differentiated profiles. \
\
>ENVIRONMENTAL IDENTITY Environmental identity refers to an individual's view \
that the work environment has a clear and stable system of goals and rewards. \
\
>VOCATIONAL IDENTITY Vocational identity refers to the clarity and stability of an \
individual's own goals and interests. Individuals with high vocational identity make \
decisions more easily and with greater confidence. \
\
B. SUPER'S LIFE/CAREER RAINBOW \
\
Donald Super's theory posits that career decision-making involves a range of changes and \
decisions from career entry to retirement. He outlines five major stages of career \
development: growth (to age 13), exploration (14 - 24), establishment (25 - 44), \
maintenance (45 - 64), and decline or disengagement (65+). Incorporated into the idea of \
developmental tasks is the concept of career maturity, the individual's ability to \
effectively master the tasks of a given stage in preparation for moving to the next stage. \
\
Critical to Super's theory is that career patterns are determined by socioeconomic factors, \
individual abilities, personal characteristics, and opportunities to which persons are \
exposed. Career is viewed as a combination of eight life roles: son/daughter, learner, \
worker, spouse/friend, homemaker, parent/grandparent, leisurite, and citizen. Super also \
proposed that individuals express their self-concepts through choice of vocation. \
\
C. KRUMBOLTZ'S SOCIAL LEARNING THEORY \
\
A developmental theory of career decision-making, Krumboltz proposed that career \
development is based on social learning, environmental conditions and events, genetic \
influences and learning experiences. People choose careers based on what they have \
learned through modeling and reinforcement. \
\
\
\
                              Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Human Resources \
\
D. TIEDEMAN AND O'HARA'S THEORY OF CAREER \
DEVELOPMENT \
\
Tiedeman and O'Hara's theory of career development focuses on the processes of \
differentiation and integration. Differentiation refers to making distinctions about the \
different aspects of oneself (e.g., characteristics one possesses) and the environment (e.g., \
seeing various aspects of a particular job instead of just one factor). Integration refers to \
unifying these different aspects and results in making better decisions, setting more refined \
goals, and developing more useful plans. Self-awareness is a key variable in this theory. \
\
This theory also focuses on the critical role that decision-making plays in career \
development, in that decisions form and structure career development. According to the \
theory, there are two stages to every decision: 1) anticipation, and 2) implementation and \
adjustment. \
\
E. SCHEIN'S CAREER ANCHOR THEORY \
\
Schein developed a theory of career anchors according to which a person's self-concept \
acts as an anchor, or stabilizing force, determining what future occupational decisions will \
be made. His research showed that people's self-concepts or "career anchors" revolved \
around one of eight categories: autonomy/independence, security/stability, \
technical/functional competence, general managerial competence, entrepreneurial \
creativity, service/dedication to a cause, pure challenge, and lifestyle. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
     4.3 ORGANIZATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY \
\
Areas in organizational psychology include leadership, job motivation and satisfaction, and \
the organization. \
\
I. LEADERSHIP THEORIES AND APPROACHES \
\
The ways in which leaders behave are based on certain assumptions about human nature \
that they consciously or unconsciously hold. \
\
A. SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT \
\
In the early 20th century, foremen (first level supervisors over production workers) were \
promoted from the ranks of workers with little training in leadership. They applied a \
combination of autocratic behavior, aggressiveness, and physical intimidation to force \
workers to produce. The predominant philosophy was that of scientific management, \
espoused by Frederick Taylor, an engineer. His concern was with finding ways to increase \
productivity, i.e., getting the workers and the machines they operated to run faster and more \
efficiently. Scientific management views workers as extensions of machines. Little \
consideration is given to employees as human beings with needs, abilities or interests. \
Workers are considered to be lazy and dishonest, with low levels of intelligence. \
\
B. HUMAN RELATIONS APPROACH \
\
Today's predominant viewpoint is called the human relations approach to management. It \
arose in the 1920s and 1930s under the impact of the Hawthorne studies, which focused \
attention on workers rather than production. \
\
The Hawthorne studies initially set out to study the effects of environmental factors (e.g., \
illumination, temperature, and rest periods) on productivity. In the Hawthorne studies, the \
leaders allowed workers to set their own production pace, and to form social groups. They \
were permitted to talk on the job and their views were solicited. \
\
The results were rather surprising and indicated that psychological factors seemed more \
important in terms of increasing productivity than the physical aspects of the work \
environment. In fact, productivity was increased not because of the changes in the work \
\
\
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
environment, but simply because the workers were being observed. This is known as the \
Hawthorne effect. \
\
The Hawthorne studies also revealed the importance of informal work groups. Although \
management had set a standard for production for these workers, the workers developed \
their own standards, and were reluctant to change them for fear of deviating from the group. \
In addition, the workers considered adhering to the group's norms even more important \
than the extra pay they would have earned for exceeding company standards. \
\
C. THEORY X, THEORY Y AND THEORY Z \
\
McGregor (1960) named the scientific management approach and the human relations \
approach Theory X and Theory Y, respectively. \
\
>THEORY X   Theory X assumes workers are lazy and must be coerced and directed \
since they have no ambition and no sense of responsibility. Theory X underlies typical \
bureaucracies. \
\
>THEORY Y Theory Y assumes that people find satisfaction in their work and that \
control and punishment are not necessary to bring about good performance. Rather, Theory \
Y proposes that people are industrious and creative, seeking challenge and responsibility. \
They function best under a leadership style that is participative. \
\
>THEORY Z Theory Z, described in Ouchi's 1981 book, How American Business Can \
Meet the Japanese Challenge, highlights three critical Japanese management strategies: \
lifelong employment with an emphasis on loyalty, slow promotion with an emphasis on \
non-specialized career paths, and high levels of group decision-making. \
\
D. TRAIT THEORIES OF LEADERSHIP \
\
Trait theories were the initial approach used when studying leadership. They are based on \
the assumption that there is a universal set of traits that can always distinguish good leaders \
from poor leaders, regardless of the situation. However, more than 50 years of research has \
produced limited and inconsistent support for this approach. Meta-analyses have found that \
those characteristics that discriminate between effective and ineffective leaders include \
drive, leader motivation (desire to be a leader rather than power for its own sake), honesty \
and integrity, self-confidence and emotional stability, high cognitive ability, and \
knowledge of the company and industry. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
Trait approaches have also been used to compare authoritarian, democratic, and laissez- \
faire leaders. An authoritarian leader is one who delegates to employees in an autocratic \
fashion, while a democratic leader is one who seeks employee input in various aspects of \
the organization. A laissez-faire leader is generally not very involved in overseeing the \
operations of the organization and often lets the employees make the decisions. \
\
In terms of satisfaction, democratic leaders are consistently associated with the greatest \
levels of employee satisfaction. In terms of productivity, the findings with democratic \
leaders are mixed, but both authoritarian and democratic leaders appear to have better \
productivity than laissez faire leaders. \
\
E. SITUATIONAL OR CONTINGENCY THEORIES OF \
LEADERSHIP \
\
Situational theories are the focus of much recent research on leadership. These approaches \
broadly argue that the effectiveness of leadership is contingent upon the situation. The most \
prominent situational theories are Fiedler's Contingency (LPC) Theory, Cognitive \
Resource Theory, Vroom and Yetton's Normative Model, House's Path-Goal Theory, and \
Hersey and Blanchard's Situational Leadership Theory. \
\
>FIEDLER'S CONTINGENCY (LPC) THEORY LPC Theory (1967) involves three \
steps. First, it looks at whether the leader (supervisor) is a task-oriented or relationship- \
oriented leader. The least preferred colleague (LPC) is the subordinate whom the leader \
likes the least. \
\
     HIGH LPC If the leader rates his or her least preferred coworker with a high \
     rating, the leader is termed a high LPC leader and is considered to be relationship \
     oriented. \
     LOW LPC If the leader rates the least preferred coworker with a poor rating, the \
     leader is considered to be a low LPC leader and is thought to be task oriented. \
\
Second, the situational control, or favorableness, is assessed. Situational control has to do \
with how likely it is that the task will be accomplished. The likelihood is affected by how \
easy or difficult the task is, how powerful the leader is, and the relationship between the \
leader and the subordinates. \
\
Finally, LPC Theory predicts that low LPCs are most effective as leaders in situations that \
are either highly favorable or unfavorable, while high LPCs are most effective as leaders \
in moderately favorable situations. \
\
\
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
>COGNITIVE RESOURCE THEORY     Cognitive Resource Theory (Fiedler and \
Garcia, 1987) was developed by Fiedler in response to criticism of his original LPC \
Theory. Cognitive Resource Theory looks at whether a directive versus non-directive \
leadership style will be more effective depending on the cognitive resources (ability) of the \
employees as well as stress levels, experience of the leader, and group support for the \
leader. \
\
>VROOM AND YETTON'S NORMATIVE MODEL Vroom and Yetton's Normative \
Model (1973) focuses on a single aspect of leadership decision-making. The theory is \
concerned with the extent to which leaders allow their subordinates to participate in making \
decisions. \
\
It looks at five styles of leadership: autocratic, consultative, group decision-making with \
the leader, group decision-making without the leader, and autocratic with information. \
According to this model, the most effective style depends on the importance of the \
decision, the degree to which subordinates accept it, and the time required to make the \
decision. \
\
>HOUSE'S PATH-GOAL THEORY   Path-Goal Theory (1971) recommends that the \
leader increase personal payoffs for subordinates and make the paths to the payoffs easier \
by clarifying and reducing roadblocks. The focus is on finding out what each employee \
finds rewarding, assessing the employee's strengths and weaknesses, and helping the \
employee to achieve his or her goals. The four types of leadership styles include directive, \
supportive, achievement oriented, and participative. \
\
>HERSEY AND BLANCHARD'S SITUATIONAL LEADERSHIP This theory looks \
at the employees' readiness to perform. If they are not ready, the leader should tell them \
what to do; if they are more ready, they need less task orientation from the leader. The four \
styles, corresponding to degrees of readiness, are telling, selling, participating, and \
delegating. \
\
F. TRANSACTIONAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERS \
\
Bernard Bass distinguished between transactional and transformational leaders. \
\
>TRANSACTIONAL LEADERS A transactional leader is the more traditional leader \
who influences subordinates through daily, fairly emotionless exchanges. The transactional \
leader aims to secure the agreed upon level of performance from the subordinates and may \
make use of rewards, management by objectives, and other conventional means. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
>TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERS In contrast, the transformational leader aims to \
broaden and elevate the goals of the subordinates. Transformational leaders utilize \
charisma, inspiration, intellectual stimulation, and individualized consideration. \
\
G. LEADERSHIP AND POWER \
\
Psychologists have proposed that there are five types of power involved in a worker's \
willingness to comply with the request of a leader. \
\
>REWARD POWER    Reward power is power based on the ability to provide rewards \
(e.g., offering bonuses for excellent performance). \
\
>COERCIVE POWER   Coercive power is related to the ability to punish (e.g., fire an \
employee for poor performance). \
\
>LEGITIMATE POWER     Legitimate power is based on the hierarchy of the \
organization (e.g., the power that comes from being in a supervisory position). \
\
>REFERENT POWER Referent power is based on identifying with, admiring, or liking \
the person in the leadership position. \
\
>EXPERT POWER Expert power comes from having expertise and skills in the relevant \
area. \
\
The first three types of power are based on position power, while the last two are based on \
personal power. Research suggests that the presence of the combination of expert and \
referent power (sometimes called incremental power) is the most important reason for \
complying with a manager's request (Yukl & Falbe, 1991). Coercive power is most \
negatively correlated with satisfaction. \
\
H. DECISION-MAKING \
\
Two approaches to decision-making are frequently cited: the rational-economic model and \
the administrative approach. \
\
>RATIONAL-ECONOMIC MODEL The rational-economic model, also referred to as \
the classical approach, involves basing decisions on a clear definition of the problem, \
\
\
\
                          Section 4- Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
knowing all possible alternatives and consequences of choices, and then choosing the \
optimal solution. \
\
>ADMINISTRATIVE APPROACH    By contrast, the behavioral or administrative \
approach, also referred to as a satisficing style, is associated with Herbert Simon. This \
approach is used when problems are ambiguous, only partial knowledge is available, and \
the first satisfactory alternative is chosen. \
\
I. CONFLICT \
\
Conflict can be intrapersonal, interpersonal, intergroup, or interorganization. Conflict \
resolution can utilize a lose-lose approach typical with compromise, a win-lose approach \
common with competition or authority, or a win-win approach typical in collaborative and \
problem-solving situations. \
\
J. NEGOTIATION \
\
Negotiation can be two-party, group, intergroup, or among constituencies (e.g .. \
management versus labor). Distributive negotiation involves parties claiming part of the \
pie, while integrative/principled negotiation involves attempting to enlarge the pie. \
Arbitration involves a third party who acts as "judge" and issues a binding decision after \
listening to both parties. \
\
II. THEORIES OF MOTIVATION \
\
Theories of motivation can be divided into need or content theories, cognitive or process \
theories, and the reinforcement model. \
\
A. NEED THEORIES OF MOTIVATION \
\
>MASLOW'S NEED HIERARCHY In Maslow's theory, human needs are arranged in \
a hierarchy of importance and people always want what they don't yet have. The five levels \
from lowest to highest are: physiological, safety, belonging and love (social), esteem, and \
self-actualization. At work, belonging needs can be satisfied through developing a social \
network, esteem needs can be satisfied by praise, and self-actualization needs can be \
satisfied by giving employees opportunities for growth and responsibility. This theory has \
received little research support and is judged to have low scientific validity and \
applicability in the workplace. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
>HERZBERG'S TWO-FACTOR THEORY     Herzberg's Two-Factor Theory, also \
known as Motivator-Hygiene Theory (1966) extends the work of Maslow. It originated \
from research in which Herzberg asked employees, "Tell me a time you felt good about \
your job," and "Tell me a time you felt bad about your job." He found that different factors \
accounted for job satisfaction as opposed to job dissatisfaction. This theory divides needs \
into upper-level and lower-level needs. \
\
     LOWER-LEVEL NEEDS   Lower-level needs, also called hygiene factors or \
     dissatisfies, relate to job context, such as pay, working conditions, supervision, etc. \
     Dissatisfaction results when lower level needs are not met, but meeting them does \
     not produce satisfaction. \
\
     UPPER-LEVEL NEEDS   Upper-level needs, called motivators or satisfiers, \
     relate to job content and include needs for achievement, responsibility, and \
     opportunity. Meeting upper level needs can increase satisfaction and motivation. \
     However, when these needs are not met, dissatisfaction does not result. \
\
Out of Herzberg's work came the concepts of job enrichment and job enlargement. \
\
     JOB ENRICHMENT Job enrichment involves expanding jobs to give employees \
     a greater role in planning and performing their work, thus providing an opportunity \
     to build satisfiers into job content. Herzberg suggested increasing employees" \
     autonomy, authority and freedom, and encouraging employees to take on new. \
     challenging tasks. Job enrichment results in increased satisfaction and performance, \
     decreased turnover and decreased absenteeism. It is also known as "vertical \
     loading." \
\
     JOB ENLARGEMENT Job enlargement simply expands the variety of tasks the \
     employee performs without increasing responsibility or autonomy. Job \
     enlargement increases satisfaction, and only slightly affects job performance. It is \
     also known as "horizontal loading." \
\
>ALDERFER'S ERG THEORY   A modification of Maslow's theory, ERG Theory \
(1972) divides needs into those based on existence, relatedness and growth. Rather than \
arranging the needs hierarchically, Alderfer posits that all needs may influence a person at \
the same time. Further, according to the principle of frustration-regression, if a person is \
frustrated, he or she will move towards a previously met need. In contrast to Maslow, \
satisfying a need (e.g., for creativity) may make the need even stronger. This theory has \
greater empirical support than Maslow. Research has found that people with more educated \
\
\
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
parents have higher growth needs, and that women have lower existence needs and higher \
relatedness needs as compared to men. \
\
>MCCLELLAND'S ACQUIRED NEEDS THEORY    McClelland's Acquired Needs \
Theory (1950s) resulted from MeClelland's experimenting with the Thematic \
Apperception Test (TAT) to measure needs. He went on to describe three significant work- \
related needs. \
\
     nACH nAch, the need for achievement, is the desire to do something better, solve \
     problems and master tasks. \
\
     nAFF nAff, the need for affiliation, is the desire to establish and maintain friendly \
     relations. \
\
     nPOWER nPower is the desire to control, influence, and be responsible for others. \
\
Most important to this theory is that these needs are acquired over time. Research has \
confirmed that people can be trained to think more like high nAch people. A high need for \
achievement has been shown to correlate highly with success of the company. \
Characteristics of people with a high need to achieve include: favoring a work environment \
where they can assume responsibility for problem solving, setting moderate and attainable \
goals, and needing recognition and feedback about their progress. \
\
B. COGNITIVE THEORIES OF MOTIVATION \
\
>GENERAL EXPECTANCY THEORY General Expectancy Theory, also known as \
Vroom's Valence-Instrumentality-Expectancy (VIE) Theory, asserts that people behave in \
ways that are based on their perceived expectancy that certain rewards will follow, and that \
in the workplace, employees perform at a level that results in the greatest payoff. The \
psychological value (valence) or reward varies from individual to individual. The three \
facets of this theory include expectancy, instrumentality, and valence. \
\
     EXPECTANCY   Expectancy refers to expectancy of success on the task. First, \
     employees decide how likely it is that their efforts will result in the desired \
     achievement on task performance. \
\
     INSTRUMENTALITY Instrumentality refers to anticipation of rewards. Second, \
     employees consider the probability that rewards will follow their accomplishment \
     or performance. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
     VALENCE Valence refers to the value the rewards have for the employees. Third, \
     employees determine how much they value the offered rewards. \
\
>ADAMS'S EQUITY THEORY    Equity Theory (1965) looks at the ratio of self- \
inputs/self-outcomes versus others' inputs/others' outcomes. This theory is based on social \
comparison theory. Adams believes that inequity is a motivating state and that we adjust \
our performance based on things appearing fair or unfair. \
\
>LOCKE'S GOAL SETTING APPROACH Locke's Goal Setting Approach (1968) is \
based on five principles: 1) goals should be specific; 2) goals should be of intermediate to \
high level of difficulty; 3) workers must receive feedback; 4) a sense of self-efficacy will \
increase performance (linked with expectancy theory); and most important 5) employees \
must accept the goals. While participation in goal setting may sometimes yield better \
results than if goals are assigned, the determining factor is whether or not employees accept \
the goals. \
\
C. REINFORCEMENT AND MOTIVATION \
\
The reinforcement model is a set of principles, according to which people perform actions \
that have rewarding outcomes, avoid actions that have punishing outcomes, and stop \
performing actions that have neither rewarding nor punishing outcomes. Research in this \
area has found that performance-contingent rewards are strongly correlated with both \
performance and satisfaction. In contrast, non-performance contingent rewards and \
punishment are not strongly linked with performance and satisfaction. \
\
III. JOB SATISFACTION AND OTHER VARIABLES \
\
Job satisfaction refers to the positive and negative feelings and attitudes we hold about our \
jobs. It depends on work-related factors as well as personal factors. Up to 30% - 40% of \
job satisfaction may be linked to genetic factors. \
\
The relationship between pay and satisfaction is among the most complex. For example, \
according to Maslow's theory, pay could be seen as meeting physiological or safety needs. \
but in some instances, it could also be seen as meeting esteem needs. McClelland sees pay \
as fulfilling different functions for individuals with different needs: as an important source \
of feedback for persons with high nAch; as a source of control for those with a high \
nPower; and, if the money comes in the form of group bonuses, as a source of affiliation \
for those with high nAff. Herzberg notes that adequate salary might meet lower level needs \
\
\
\
                          Section 4- Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
and prevent dissatisfaction, while merit pay might meet upper level needs and increase \
satisfaction. \
\
A. SATISFACTION AND PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS \
\
Research has shown the following findings about satisfaction and personal characteristics. \
\
>AGE In general, job satisfaction increases with age, regardless of type of work or sex. \
\
>GENDER   No clear patterns of gender difference have been found in terms of \
satisfaction. \
\
>RACE Whites report more job satisfaction as compared to minorities, and these \
differences are most significant among managers. \
\
>OCCUPATIONAL LEVEL The higher the overall occupational level, the higher job \
satisfaction is. \
\
>HEALTH There is a correlation between job dissatisfaction and poorer physical and \
mental health. \
\
B. SATISFACTION AND OTHER VARIABLES \
\
Research has indicated the following with regard to the relationship of satisfaction and \
other variables. \
\
>PRODUCTIVITY   There is a weak positive correlation between satisfaction and \
productivity (.17). \
\
>ABSENTEEISM/TURNOVER   Job satisfaction has a moderate negative correlation \
(about .4) with absenteeism and turnover. \
\
>PAY There is a positive correlation between pay and satisfaction, especially fairness of \
pay. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
C. ABSENTEEISM \
\
>SEX The strongest correlation with absenteeism is sex, with females having higher \
levels of absenteeism. \
\
>COMPANY SIZE There is generally less absenteeism in smaller companies. \
\
>AGE Older workers have more unavoidable absences, but fewer avoidable absences. \
They also have decreased turnover. \
\
D. TURNOVER \
\
The following results have been found with regard to turnover. \
\
>TENURE   Tenure and expressed interest to stay are most strongly correlated with \
turnover (negative correlation). \
\
>PAY AND OPPORTUNITY FOR PROMOTION Pay and opportunity for promotion \
have negative correlations with turnover. \
\
>ROUTINE WORK Routine work results in increased turnover. \
\
>PRODUCTIVITY There is no evidence of a relationship between productivity and \
turnover. \
\
E. JOB-RELATED FACTORS \
\
In addition to personal factors, job-related factors affect motivation and satisfaction. An \
example of a job-related factor is the particular approach the company takes towards its \
employees. \
\
>HUMAN FACTORS APPROACH The human factors approach, contrary to what the \
name sounds like, is concerned with physical aspects of the job. Time and motion studies \
address ways to maximize speed and minimize wasted movement. The focus is on the \
"operator-machine system," how humans and machines work together to accomplish a job. \
\
>THE PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH    The psychological approach to job design \
assumes that efficiency and effectiveness are correlated with satisfaction, and that \
\
\
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
satisfaction allows people to meet self-actualization needs. The psychological approach \
includes job enlargement (horizontal loading) in which the number of tasks is increased \
without increasing the responsibility level. Job enlargement appears to increase satisfaction \
more than performance. By contrast, job enrichment is accomplished by increasing \
responsibilities (vertical loading), and results in increased satisfaction and performance, as \
well as decreased turnover and absenteeism. Individual preferences for job enrichment \
exist, with those in favor of it tending to be high in growth-need strength, knowledge and \
skill, and tending to be most satisfied by job content factors. \
\
IV. ORGANIZATIONAL ISSUES \
\
A. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURES \
\
There are four common organizational structures. \
\
>TRADITIONAL Traditional, also known as hierarchical, is the typical bureaucracy. \
\
>PROJECT Project is centered on specific products or services. For example, a hospital \
may be structured around "product lines" (e.g., emergency medicine, surgery, and \
education), rather than structured by disciplines (e.g., physicians, nurses, support staff). \
\
>TEAM Team is centered on work teams or groups that report to upper level managers. \
\
>MULTIDIMENSIONAL Multidimensional involves more than one type of structure \
(e.g., both traditional and team). \
\
Overall, the trend is movement away from traditional organizational structures and toward \
multidimensional structures. Rather than centralizing power in a small upper echelon of \
executives, the trend is toward broadly sharing authority and decision-making. \
\
B. PARTICIPATIVE ORGANIZATIONAL STYLE \
\
The participative organizational style rests on three assumptions (Lawler, 1986). The first \
assumption is human relations, or the idea that people want to participate. When people are \
allowed to participate in decision-making, they will accept change more easily, and will be \
more satisfied and committed to the organization. The second assumption is human \
resources, or the notion that people are a valuable resource because they have knowledge \
and ideas. When employees participate in decisions, the result is better solutions. The third \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
assumption is high involvement, the idea that people can be trusted to develop knowledge \
and skills in order to make important decisions about management and their work. \
\
>QUALITY-OF-WORK-LIFE PROGRAMS (QWL) QWL programs target changes \
in organizational style in various ways. They are participative programs intended to \
improve the quality of working life. Workers are involved in teams that meet weekly to \
discuss problems in their areas of responsibility, including extrinsic factors (e.g., physical \
working conditions), and intrinsic factors (e.g., employee involvement and satisfaction). \
QWL programs have been found to have a greater effect on satisfaction than performance. \
\
>QUALITY CONTROL CIRCLES (QCC) Based on the work of Maslow, McClelland \
and Herzberg, QCCs are not concerned with the quality of work life but with specific ways \
to improve the finished product and the level of production. While they may enhance \
satisfaction, the goal is improved quantity and quality of production (which fits in with the \
agendas of total quality management and continuous improvement). \
\
The key principles of QCCs are that workers must be given greater responsibility for their \
work and must be allowed to participate in decisions affecting the nature of the work and \
the way it is performed. A quality control circle consists of 7-10 employees from the same \
department. QCCs typically affect only the organizational unit, not the organization as a \
whole. Membership is voluntary and usually only a small percentage of workers agrees to \
join. Companies with quality control circles report increases in production and satisfaction \
and decreases in absenteeism and turnover. \
\
C. ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND CULTURE \
\
>ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Organizations are faced with the challenge \
of engaging in continuous self-assessment and planned change. Organizational \
development (OD) focuses on total organizational change and on systematic ways to bring \
about planned changes. The goal is to assist the organization to adapt to a changing work \
environment, to improve its ability to respond to future changes, and to help employees \
develop a new sense of purpose for their organization. OD is an application of behavioral \
science knowledge in a long-range effort to increase the organization's ability to cope with \
change in the external environment and to increase internal problem solving. \
\
OD takes a systems approach to organizational problems. Outside consultants evaluate \
strengths and weaknesses and develop strategies for change. Implementation begins with \
top management and needs management's support. Process goals include communication, \
interaction, and decision-making. Outcome goals involve increasing task performance. \
\
\
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
OD interventions are targeted at a variety of levels. Strategies at the organization-wide \
level include survey feedback, confrontation meetings, structural redesign, collateral \
organization, and MBO. At the group level, interventions include team building, process \
consultation, and intergroup team building. At the individual level, elements include \
sensitivity training, management training, role negotiation, job redesign, and career \
planning. Research has found OD interventions difficult to evaluate. Overall, the most \
robust finding is that the more rigorous the research, the smaller the effect is. \
\
>ORGANIZATION CULTURE    Organization culture involves the beliefs, values, \
customs, and behaviors of the organization. An analysis of more than 2,000 companies \
found that those with a culture of high involvement and high participation consistently \
outperformed those that didn't favor involvement and participation (Denison, 1990). \
\
D. COMMUNICATION \
\
There are two basic types of communication networks, those that are centralized and those \
that are decentralized. \
\
>CENTRALIZED COMMUNICATION NETWORKS      Centralized communication \
networks are like a wheel or chain, with one person in the middle who gets all the \
information. They are best for simple tasks, and result in fairly rapid communication. \
\
>DECENTRALIZED COMMUNICATION NETWORKS Decentralized networks are \
like a pinwheel, an all-channel, or a star, in which all members can communicate with one \
another. They are best for tasks involving problem-solving and communication. However, \
they result in slower communication. \
\
Overall, satisfaction is greatest in less centralized networks. Individual satisfaction is most \
associated with the centrality of one's position. The current trend is toward greater \
decentralization of communication. \
\
E. GROUPS IN ORGANIZATIONS \
\
E1. INFORMAL GROUPS \
\
Informal groups are distinguished from formal groups that receive "official" designation \
by the organization to serve a specific purpose. Informal work groups are the organization \
within the organization and have the power to shape employee attitudes, behavior, and \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
productivity. Workers come together informally to establish and promote a set of norms \
and values. These groups can work for or against the company by encouraging or thwarting \
productivity and cooperation with company policies. An example of the power of informal \
work groups came from the Hawthorne studies where a team of 14 workers was observed. \
The group had determined its own standard, called a performance norm, which was below \
the company's standard. Even though they were capable of producing more, they stayed \
within the group norm. A related effect of informal work groups is social loafing, or the \
Ringelmann effect, according to which people don't work as hard in a group as they do on \
their own. \
\
In general, informal groups tend to attract and retain people with similar personality \
characteristics, and they take on a consistent affective tone. The degree of closeness is \
called group cohesiveness. The greater the cohesiveness, the greater is the group's power \
over its members and the greater the pressure to conform. Factors that influence \
cohesiveness include: group size (larger are less cohesive), diversity (more diverse are less \
cohesive), team rewards (increase cohesiveness), outside pressures and threats (increase \
cohesiveness), difficulty to join the group (increases cohesiveness), and frequent \
interactions (increase cohesiveness). Being a part of a group can increase satisfaction, and \
decrease turnover, absenteeism, and job strain. \
\
Stages of group development include forming, storming (including conflicts over \
leadership), norming (initial integration), performing (total integration), and adjourning. \
\
E2. TYPES OF GROUP TASKS \
\
Many tasks may be difficult to perform without groups. Three basic types of group tasks \
are classified as additive, disjunctive, and conjunctive. \
\
>ADDITIVE TASKS   An additive task is one in which group members' separate \
performances are added to produce a combined effect. For example, a group of scientists \
and engineers combine their talents to construct a space shuttle. \
\
>DISJUNCTIVE TASKS A disjunctive task is one in which the outcome is affected by \
the performance of the most effective group member. For example, a group meets to decide \
how to improve the company's marketing strategy, and one person comes up with an \
outstanding idea. \
\
>CONJUNCTIVE TASKS     A conjunctive task is one in which the group's \
accomplishment is limited by the performance of the least effective member. For example, \
\
\
\
                          Section 4- Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
one member of a quality control team sleeps during his shift, resulting in significant product \
errors. \
\
E3. GROUP DECISION-MAKING \
\
Several important findings have been noted with regard to group decision-making. \
\
>GROUP EFFECTIVENESS Groups make better decisions than individuals when the \
problem has multiple parts that are susceptible to division of labor. Heterogeneous groups \
make better decisions than homogeneous groups. However, there can be problems with \
cohesion in heterogeneous groups. The ideal group size for decision-making and \
effectiveness is either five or seven members. In situations requiring deliberation (e.g., \
juries), an even number is more effective. Groups work best when common goals are more \
important to members than individual goals. \
\
>BRAINSTORMING   Brainstorming is one technique for improving group decision- \
making. Brainstorming appears superior to an open group discussion when the goals \
involve creative thinking. Overall, research suggests that when people brainstorm alone, \
they come up with better solutions than when they brainstorm in a group. \
\
>RISKY SHIFT Risky shift is the tendency for people in groups to make riskier decisions \
than they would if they were deciding as individuals. For example, people making business \
investments individually are more cautious, while people who pool their monies and make \
business investments as a group are much more likely to make riskier investments. Because \
of the tendency to make riskier decisions, groups can be more creative and innovative than \
individuals working alone. \
\
>RESPONSE POLARIZATION     Response polarization, also known as group \
polarization, is the tendency for people in groups to become more extreme in their views. \
For example, if someone opposed to abortion joins a group of like-minded people, he or \
she will probably become more strongly opposed to abortion. \
\
>GROUPTHINK   Groupthink occurs in highly cohesive groups when group members \
seek concurrence, consensus, and unanimity more than they seek the best possible \
alternative. When groupthink occurs, there is a tendency for group members to think alike \
and lose their critical evaluative capacities due to social pressures to conform. A significant \
historical example comes from the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. Prior to the \
attack, the commander-in-chief of the U.S. Pacific Fleet met with his high-level staff \
members at headquarters in Hawaii to discuss whether they should prepare for a possible \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Organizational Psychology \
\
attack by Japan. Sharing similar backgrounds and perspectives, the admiral and his \
advisors discounted many warnings of imminent attack and continued with business as \
usual. Thus, they were completely unprepared for the devastating attack on Pearl Harbor. \
\
\
\
                        Section 4 - Industrial/Organizational: Characteristics of the Workplace \
\
         4.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE \
                     WORKPLACE \
\
I. PHYSICAL WORKING CONDITIONS \
\
Factors in the physical work environment affect employee attitudes and performance. \
\
>TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY    Performance declines not just as temperature \
increases, but also as humidity increases. Uncomfortable climate affects quantity and \
quality of production. \
\
>ILLUMINATION Inadequate lighting is a source of distress. Optimal levels of intensity \
(the level of brightness) vary depending on the nature of the task. For example, working \
on small parts generally requires bright light. In addition, older workers generally need \
brighter lights than younger workers. The way a room is lit can also affect people's \
feelings. Most people feel better when there are several lamps lit rather than one overhead \
source. \
\
>NOISE Loud noises are threatening to hearing: prolonged exposures to over 85 dB can \
result in some hearing loss; exposures to over 120 dB can cause temporary deafness; and \
even brief exposures to over 130 dB can cause permanent deafness. Most people can adapt \
to constant or continuous noises, but intermittent noise is more distracting. Perception of \
ability to control noise may be more important than the actual ability to control noise. \
\
>COLOR   Different colors have different effects on emotion. Blues and greens (cool \
colors) are soothing; red causes excitement; yellow and orange (warm colors) cause \
alertness; and gray is depressing. \
\
>MUSIC Music has been found to increase production slightly for assembly line jobs \
that are repetitive and simple. For more demanding work, there is no evidence that music \
increases productivity. \
\
\
 \
\
                        Section + - Industrial/ Organizational: Characteristics of the Workplace \
\
II. WORK SCHEDULES \
\
When nominal working hours (hours at the job) increase, actual working hours (hours spent \
getting the work done) decrease. The longer the workday or workweek, the lower the \
productivity. This finding holds true even for highly motivated workers. \
\
>COMPRESSED WORK WEEKS Compressed work weeks (e.g. four ten-hour days) \
are utilized by about 20% of the workforce. They result in decreased anxiety, decreased \
turnover, and increased satisfaction. Drawbacks include fatigue and possible customer \
complaints due to unavailable personnel. The effect on productivity is mixed, and generally \
there appear to be initial positive effects which wear off over time. \
\
>FLEXTIME Flextime allows employees to choose when they start and end their work \
day, provided they work their required number of hours and are available during specific \
core hours set by the company (e.g., 10:00 am - 2:00 pm). Flextime is utilized by about \
40% of the workforce. The findings are mixed, in that some say flextime increases morale \
and productivity and decreases lateness, absenteeism, and turnover (Petersen, 1980), while \
others say there are no differences in productivity or satisfaction. \
\
>REST BREAKS Breaks increase morale and productivity and they reduce fatigue and \
boredom. They have maximum effect if taken during the fourth and eighth hour of work. \
\
>SHIFT WORK    In terms of shift work, most workers prefer day work. There is a \
tendency for increased error and decreased output on the night shift. Afternoon and night \
shifts are frequently more stressful than day shifts. Night shifts are correlated with more \
health problems. Rotating shifts are the most detrimental to health. \
\
III. SAFETY \
\
OSHA (1970) regulates safety and health. Six million work-related accidents occur per \
year, with 10,000 to 14,000 deaths. Workers who are most likely to have on-the-job \
accidents are those who have experienced the highest levels of stress in their lives. Hazards \
in the workplace can be reduced by designing safer equipment and taking more care with \
inherently dangerous substances (e.g., solvents). \
\
Safety education and training programs are most effective when there is practice, feedback, \
and reinforcement. Of all interventions, safety incentive programs work the best to reduce \
occupational accidents. \
\
\
\
                     \
\
  TREATMENT/INTERVENTION \
\
                        SECTION 5 \
\
                      PsychPrep \
                      PASS EFFICIENTLY \
 \
\
                     SECTION 5: \
        TREATMENT/INTERVENTION \
\
The section for treatment/intervention describes individual, family, group, crisis and \
community intervention. Additionally, some general therapy issues are discussed, and \
psychotherapy outcome research is reviewed. \
\
         5.1 INTERVENTIONS BASED ON \
                    BEHAVIORISM \
\
Behaviorists believe that behavior is generated and maintained by factors external to the \
person, by various environmental and situational stimuli. Behaviorists propose that \
psychopathology results from problematic learned patterns. \
\
Behavioral interventions fall into three categories: those based on principles of classical \
conditioning, those based on principles of operant conditioning, and those based on social \
learning theory. \
\
I. TREATMENT APPROACHES BASED ON CLASSICAL \
CONDITIONING \
\
Clinical interventions based on classical conditioning involve unlearning previous \
problematic connections (e.g., connections that have resulted in phobias, anxiety, or \
addictions). Change is accomplished by techniques that rely either on counterconditioning \
or on classical extinction. \
\
A. COUNTERCONDITIONING \
\
Counterconditioning is based on the principle of reciprocal inhibition. Reciprocal \
inhibition is the notion that two incompatible responses cannot be experienced at the same \
time, but rather that the stronger response will inhibit the weaker (e.g., fear will inhibit \
pleasure). \
\
\
\
                                  Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Behaviorism \
\
The focus of treatment is on weakening the maladaptive conditioned response (e.g., fear of \
rats) by strengthening an incompatible or antagonistic response (e.g., relaxation). \
\
Specific interventions based on counterconditioning include systematic desensitization. \
sensate focus, assertiveness training, and aversive counterconditioning. \
\
>SYSTEMATIC DESENSITIZATION    Systematic desensitization is a counter- \
conditioning technique developed by Joseph Wolpe. It has most commonly been used to \
treat specific phobias. Desensitization first involves training the client to relax deeply. The \
client then constructs an "anxiety hierarchy." or a list of situations ranked by how much \
anxiety they produce. The therapist has the client relax while gradually exposing the client \
to the feared situation lowest on the hierarchy. Exposure can occur either in imagination or \
in vivo. Once the client can be exposed to an item without any increase in anxiety or muscle \
tension, the therapist proceeds to the next item on the list. The process continues until the \
situation that originally provoked anxiety now elicits only relaxation, which is an \
antagonistic or incompatible response to fear. \
\
Previous research suggested that systematic desensitization was the most effective \
procedure for specific phobias. However, more recent research has concluded that \
treatments that emphasize prolonged and intense exposure (e.g., flooding) are most \
efficacious for specific phobias. \
\
>SENSATE FOCUS This technique, developed by Masters and Johnson, uses pleasure \
as the counterconditioning response to inhibit performance anxiety. Pleasure is elicited by \
body massages that are discontinued at the first sign of anxiety. Anxiety is also diminished \
by initially requiring the couple to abstain from intercourse. The goal is to eventually \
experience pleasure from intercourse with no anxiety. \
\
Masters and Johnson divide the sexual response cycle into four stages: excitement, plateau, \
orgasm, and resolution. In the excitement phase, arousal is initiated either through physical \
factors (e.g., touching) or psychological factors (fantasy). It is this stage that sensate focus \
is designed to influence. The plateau phase involves further increases in stimulation and \
physiological functions (e.g., heart rate, respiration). During the orgasm phase the person \
experiences an intense and pleasurable release of tension, and ejaculation occurs in the \
male. The resolution stage involves a gradual return to pre-excitement levels. \
\
>ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING This technique utilizes the assertive response, which \
is antagonistic to social anxiety. Some people feel anxious in social situations because they \
have difficulty speaking up for what they feel is right or saying no when others take \
\
\
 \
\
                                   Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Behaviorism \
\
advantage of them. Clients practice assertive responses, initially by role playing with the \
therapist, and eventually in real-life situations. With these more effective coping strategies, \
 clients experience less social anxiety. \
\
>AVERSIVE COUNTERCONDITIONING Aversive counterconditioning is only used \
to eliminate "deviant" or "bad" behaviors like drinking, cigarette smoking, or fetishes. In \
aversive counterconditioning, the conditioned stimulus is paired with a new and stronger \
stimulus. The new stimulus elicits a strong negative response that is incompatible with the \
old conditioned response of pleasure. For example, the old stimulus of smoking a cigarette \
is paired with a new stimulus of electric shock. The new response of pain from the electric \
shock is stronger than and incompatible with the old response of pleasure from the \
cigarette. Thus, the learned pairing of smoking with pleasure will be weakened. \
\
Aversive counterconditioning can be done either in vivo, or in imagination. When it is done \
in imagination, it is called covert sensitization. An example of in vivo aversive conditioning \
is Antabuse (disulfiram). The new response of nausea and vomiting when ingesting alcohol \
is incompatible with the prior response of pleasure. An example of covert sensitization \
involves imagining cancer cells destroying one's body as one takes a puff of a cigarette. \
The bad feelings associated with this image are incompatible with the pleasure of smoking. \
\
Aversive conditioning has been applied in the treatment of paraphilias. Research indicates \
that although aversive conditioning may have short-term benefits, it is not effective in the \
long run, and it is associated with high rates of recidivism. \
\
B. CLASSICAL EXTINCTION \
\
Treatment interventions based on classical extinction involve presenting the conditioned \
stimulus (CS) without the unconditioned stimulus (US) either over several trials, or for an \
extended period of time, to the point that the conditioned stimulus (CS) no longer elicits \
the conditioned response (CR). The reason most fears don't extinguish naturally is because \
people avoid the CS or quickly flee from it when confronted by it. \
\
Classical extinction can be accomplished using one of two techniques, either in vivo \
exposure (exposure with response prevention) or exposure in imagination. \
\
>IN VIVO EXPOSURE In vivo exposure (exposure with response prevention) involves \
presenting the conditioned stimulus (CS) without the unconditioned stimulus (US). For \
many phobias, we don't know what the unconditioned stimulus originally was. For \
example, in a spider phobia, the spider is the conditioned stimulus (CS), and we can only \
\
\
\
                                  Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Behaviorism \
\
guess at what the unconditioned stimulus (US) was, perhaps a mother screaming at the \
sight of the spider. To use exposure to eliminate the phobia, the client would be exposed \
to the spider (CS) while being prevented from fleeing. This exposure would continue until \
the person's fear has extinguished. \
\
Research has found that in terms of extinction, prolonged exposure (e.g., 45 minutes) is \
more effective than multiple, briefer periods of exposure, which can actually exacerbate \
the fear. Exposure with response prevention appears to be more effective than systematic \
desensitization for specific phobias. It is the treatment of choice for obsessive-compulsive \
disorder, and widely used in the treatment of PTSD. In vivo exposure is also typically \
included as part of the cognitive behavioral treatment protocol for social anxiety disorder, \
panic disorder, and agoraphobia. \
\
>EXPOSURE IN IMAGINATION Exposure can also take place in imagination (e.g .. \
asking a client to vividly recall a scene in which the client was attacked). Stampfl developed \
a specific treatment based on exposure in imagination, called implosive therapy. After the \
client is exposed to the feared object in imagination, the therapist interprets possible \
psychosexual themes. Research has demonstrated that the treatment gains from implosive \
therapy were due only to the exposure aspect of the treatment. The elaboration of \
psychosexual themes did not add to treatment effectiveness. \
\
II. TREATMENT APPROACHES BASED ON OPERANT \
CONDITIONING \
\
Clinical interventions based on operant conditioning involve either reinforcement or \
punishment. Typically, a functional assessment is conducted prior to the implementation \
of a reinforcement or punishment paradigm. A functional assessment of behavior involves \
defining the target behavior and determining its antecedents and consequences. It also \
includes identifying the contingencies (i.e., reinforcers and punishers) that serve to \
maintain the behavior. These contingencies can then be manipulated as part of a behavior \
modification program. \
\
A. REINFORCEMENT \
\
Reinforcers can be classified into three types: primary, secondary, and generalized. \
\
     Primary reinforcers are those reinforcers that reinforce everyone at all ages and \
     in all cultures (e.g., food). \
\
\
 \
\
                                  Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Behaviorism \
\
     Secondary reinforcers acquire their reinforcing value through training or \
     experience (e.g., praise). \
\
     Generalized conditioned reinforcers are not inherently reinforcing. However. \
     they take on reinforcing value because they give the person access to other \
     reinforcers (e.g., money, tokens). \
\
Intervention strategies that involve reinforcement include shaping, token economies, \
contingency contracting, the Premack principle, differential reinforcement, and self- \
reinforcement. These are described below. \
\
>SHAPING In shaping by successive approximations, a person is reinforced for every \
step taken toward achieving the target behavior. For example, if a child with autism \
spectrum disorder is being taught to say her name "Michelle," she is reinforced initially for \
making any vocalization, then for saying "M," and so forth, until she can say her name. \
\
>TOKEN ECONOMIES Token economies involve using tokens in a systematic and \
consistent manner as reinforcement for appropriate behaviors. This procedure was \
originally implemented on schizophrenic inpatient wards, where patients were given \
tokens for self-help behaviors (e.g., grooming, making their beds), as well as adaptive, \
prosocial behaviors. Patients could spend their tokens on goods or privileges, such as \
cigarettes, watching television, trips off the ward, etc. Patients were also fined tokens for \
undesirable behaviors (e.g., destroying property). Token economies have since been \
applied in other institutional settings, for example, with individuals with intellectual \
disability, with children with autism spectrum disorder, and with juvenile offenders. \
\
>CONTINGENCY CONTRACTING    Contingency contracting is an application of \
operant conditioning techniques to the naturalistic environment. Contingency contracting \
can be utilized when there are problematic interactions between two or more people. The \
therapist helps the people involved to identify the behaviors they most want from one \
another, and then helps them negotiate a contract for their exchange. \
\
>THE PREMACK PRINCIPLE The Premack principle, also known as the principle of \
reinforcer relativity, involves using a high-frequency behavior (i.e., something a person \
does frequently without any outside coercion) to reinforce a low-frequency behavior (i.e., \
something a person does not often due unless forced). A common example of this principle \
is requiring a child to eat her peas (a low-frequency behavior) before going out to play (a \
high-frequency behavior). This principle is also known as "Grandma's Rule." \
\
\
\
                                  Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Behaviorism \
\
>DIFFERENTIAL REINFORCEMENT OF OTHER BEHAVIORS Differential \
reinforcement of other behaviors (DRO), also known as DRI (differential reinforcement of \
incompatible responses) or DRA (differential reinforcement of alternative responses). \
combines extinction and positive reinforcement. For example, a hyperactive child is \
ignored when she speaks out of turn (extinction), but she is reinforced when she waits for \
her turn to speak, is engaged in on-task behavior, raises her hand to ask questions, or \
remains seated. \
\
>SELF-REINFORCEMENT Self-reinforcement involves administering reinforcement \
to oneself. For example, in implementing a weight management program, a person rewards \
him or herself for each pound lost. Self-reinforcement is one element of behavioral self- \
control or self-regulation procedures. \
\
Other self-control procedures include: self-monitoring, in which one keeps a detailed \
record of what one does, such as everything one eats; and stimulus control, which involves \
narrowing the range of stimuli that elicit a particular behavior (e.g., eating only at specific \
times at a specific table) and developing incompatible responses (e.g., going for a walk \
instead of snacking). \
\
B. AVERSIVE CONTROL OF BEHAVIOR \
\
The four paradigms that involve elements of aversive control of behavior are positive \
punishment, escape learning, avoidance learning, and overcorrection. \
\
>POSITIVE PUNISHMENT   Positive punishment involves applying an aversive \
stimulus (e.g., yelling) after an undesirable behavior has been emitted. Positive punishment \
is rarely used in clinical settings. An example of positive punishment is thought stopping. \
in which the client snaps a rubber band on the wrist whenever thinking an undesirable \
thought. \
\
Research has found that punishment merely suppresses behavior but does not eliminate it. \
To optimize the effectiveness of punishment, it should be delivered at maximum intensity \
the first time, it should be certain, and there should be little delay between the occurrence \
of the undesirable behavior and the punishment. When there is a sequence of undesirable \
behaviors, punishment should be delivered early rather than late in the response sequence. \
For example, a child should be punished when starting to whine rather than waiting for the \
behavior to escalate into a temper tantrum. When punishment is used, alternative routes to \
reinforcement should be made clear. \
\
\
 \
\
                                  Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Behaviorism \
\
>ESCAPE LEARNING In the escape learning paradigm, the aversive stimulus cannot \
be avoided altogether. However, once the aversive stimulus has started, it can be stopped \
by emitting the desired behavior. For example, an animal is shocked and can get the shock \
to stop by pressing a lever. Another example would be a woman who is mugged at gun \
point and can only make the assailant go away by giving him her wallet. \
\
>AVOIDANCE LEARNING In the avoidance learning paradigm, one can entirely avoid \
the aversive stimulus by emitting the desired behavior in time. Typically, a discriminative \
stimulus or cue occurs to let the subject know it's time to emit the behavior. For example, \
a red light flashes, cueing the animal to press the lever. If the animal does so in time, the \
shock can be entirely avoided. Or, on many bills there is a "pay before" date. If payment \
is made in a timely fashion, late penalties and fees can be avoided entirely. \
\
>OVERCORRECTION Overcorrection is a type of punishment that involves restitution \
or reparation, as well as physical guidance. For example, if a child makes a mess in the \
living room, he is not only required to clean up the living room, but also to clean up another \
room. Physical guidance may be necessary to help the person complete the different steps \
of the task. \
\
III. TREATMENT APPROACHES BASED ON SOCIAL \
LEARNING THEORY \
\
The clinical applications of social learning theory typically involve modeling of adaptive \
behaviors to replace maladaptive ones. Modeling procedures are applied in the treatment \
of phobias, to improve social skills, and to repair behavioral deficits. The three well-known \
variations of modeling procedures are symbolic modeling, live or in-vivo modeling, and \
participant modeling. \
\
>SYMBOLIC MODELING     Symbolic modeling, or filmed modeling, involves \
observing a film in which a model (frequently one similar to the viewer) enjoys \
progressively more intimate interaction with a feared object or anxiety-producing setting. \
\
>LIVE OR IN-VIVO MODELING Live or in-vivo modeling entails having the person \
observe a live model engage in graduated interactions with a feared object or anxiety- \
producing situation. \
\
>PARTICIPANT MODELING Participant modeling consists of live modeling plus \
contact with the model. The model gradually guides the person in activities either involving \
\
\
\
                                  Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Behaviorism \
\
physically interacting with the feared object, or dealing with the anxiety-producing \
situation. Participant modeling is particularly appropriate for children with phobias. \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Cognitive-Behaviorism \
\
         5.2 INTERVENTIONS BASED ON \
           COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORISM \
\
Only relatively recently has cognition been included on a large scale into the domain of \
behavior theory. It has become clear that organisms do not simply learn associations or \
develop responses by trial and error. Rather, learning is characterized by internal processes \
that must be understood. Early critics of the pure behavioral model of learning included \
Wolfgang Kohler, known for his insight studies with chimps (1925), and Edward Tolman, \
known for his studies with rats that demonstrated "latent learning" (1930). \
\
I. ELLIS: RATIONAL EMOTIVE BEHAVIOR THERAPY \
(REBT) \
\
Rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT), formerly known as rational-emotive therapy \
(RET) was the first cognitive-behavioral treatment approach, born out of Ellis's \
dissatisfaction with psychoanalysis. \
\
REBT approaches problems in a direct and straightforward way, by convincing clients of \
their irrationality. Emotional disturbances are thought to result from irrational beliefs. \
\
Ellis proposed an ABC model to help clarify the role of cognition in behavior, where A is \
an activating event, B is the belief, and C is the consequence or emotional/behavioral \
outcome. While pure behaviorists propose a direct connection between A and C, Ellis \
proposed that it is not the activating event, but rather one's beliefs about the event that \
result in the consequence. The DEF component is the result of therapy, where D is the \
disputing intervention, E is the adoption of a more effective philosophy, and F represents \
new feelings. \
\
Direct instruction, persuasion and logical disputation are the major procedural components \
of REBT. The therapist identifies the nature of the client's irrational beliefs early in \
treatment and actively disputes those beliefs. Clients are trained to recognize their own \
irrational beliefs and to dispute them actively. The therapist models more rational beliefs \
and provides explicit feedback to the client. \
\
\
\
                             Section 5 -Treatment/ Intervention: Cognitive-Behaviorism \
\
Overall, REBT techniques are active and confrontative. They also include modeling, \
homework, relaxation, and rehearsal. REBT therapy is multimodal and integrates \
cognitive, affective and behavioral techniques. \
\
REBT has been applied to an array of problems, including anxiety, depression, anger, \
marital difficulties, interpersonal problems, personality disorders, eating disorders, and \
psychotic behavior. In summary, REBT focuses on providing clients with an alternative \
philosophical system, by relying largely on persuasion and reason as the means of \
modifying beliefs. \
\
II. BECK: COGNITIVE THERAPY (CT) \
\
Beck's cognitive therapy overlaps considerably with Ellis's REBT with regard to its \
cognitive focus. However, Beck's approach differs in that it emphasizes empirical \
hypothesis testing as a means of changing existing beliefs. Behavioral assignments and \
homework are presented as experiments to allow clients to test the validity of their beliefs. \
Beck also makes use of Socratic questioning, which involves continually seeking the \
client's views about the presenting problem. Beck advocates a more collaborative style \
than that used in REBT. \
\
Beck posits that psychological symptoms result from automatic thoughts that are \
maladaptive, such as negative thinking in depression. Such automatic thoughts often occur \
outside of conscious awareness. Beck also coined the terms logical errors, as well as faulty \
conceptions and self-signals. \
\
According to Beck, depression results from a maladaptive cognitive triad. \
\
>NEGATIVE VIEW OF THE SELF The self is viewed negatively and is seen as \
defective and inadequate. \
\
>NEGATIVE VIEW OF THE WORLD   The world is experienced negatively, events \
are interpreted negatively, and there is an expectation of failure and punishment. \
\
>NEGATIVE VIEW OF THE FUTURE There is an expectation of continued hardship \
or a negative appraisal of the future. \
\
Cognitive therapy techniques include such tasks as keeping daily logs, activity scheduling, \
attempting gradual tasks to increase mastery, and encouragement of activities to check out \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 5 -Treatment/ Intervention: Cognitive-Behaviorism \
\
one's cognitions. The goal is to identify and test negative cognitions, to develop alternative \
and more flexible schemas, and to rehearse both new cognitive and new behavioral \
responses. \
\
III. MEICHENBAUM: COGNITIVE BEHAVIOR \
MODIFICATION (CBM) \
\
Two programs associated with Meichenbaum's CBM are self-instructional training and \
stress inoculation training. Meichenbaum's approach tends to focus on "self-statements," \
or the verbalizations that clients make to themselves. Like Beck, his approach emphasizes \
collaboration and a Socratic style of questioning. \
\
A. SELF-INSTRUCTION THERAPY \
\
Self-instruction therapy is a set of procedures that combines modeling and graduated \
practice with elements of rational emotive theory, to help children or adults who have \
problems with task completion. Self-instruction therapy has been empirically supported for \
children with ADHD. \
\
Self-instruction therapy involves a five-step procedure: \
\
>THERAPIST MODELING First, the therapist models the task at hand, verbalizing the \
steps involved. \
\
>THERAPIST VERBALIZATION Next, the client performs the task while the therapist \
verbalizes the steps. \
\
>PATIENT VERBALIZATION Next, the client performs the task while verbalizing the \
steps. \
\
>PATIENT SILENTLY TALKS THROUGH THE TASK Then, the client performs \
the task while inaudibly moving his or her lips. \
\
>INDEPENDENT TASK PERFORMANCE Finally, the client performs the task while \
thinking the task through. \
\
There is a slight parallel here with protocol analysis. Protocol analysis is a procedure that \
is used when a person is learning a task and is asked to describe aloud the steps being taken \
\
\
\
                             Section 5 -Treatment/ Intervention: Cognitive-Behaviorism \
\
to solve the task. Protocol analysis is used to gain access to people's problem-solving \
strategies. \
\
B. STRESS INOCULATION TRAINING (SIT) \
\
Stress inoculation training (SIT) provides a set of guidelines for treating stressed \
individuals. Developed by Meichenbaum, SIT has been empirically validated for the \
treatment of PTSD. It has also been widely applied with clients experiencing excessive \
anxiety, stress, problems with anger, and medical problems. \
\
The central concept underlying SIT is that of "inoculation," the idea that bolstering a \
client's repertoire of coping responses to milder stressors can decrease susceptibility to \
more severe stress. The SIT approach allows clients to master stress gradually. \
\
Stress inoculation training involves a three-phase intervention approach: \
\
>EDUCATION AND COGNITIVE PREPARATION In the initial phase clients are \
taught that they do not react directly to events, but rather that their reactions depend upon \
their interpretations of events. Clients also learn that coping abilities profoundly affect the \
subjective experience of stress. \
\
>COPING SKILLS ACQUISITION The second phase focuses on developing new \
coping skills or encouraging clients to utilize already available coping skills. Skills \
typically include relaxation, coping self-statements, imagery, and thought stopping. During \
this phase, skills are taught and practiced primarily in the treatment setting. \
\
>APPLICATION OF SKILLS IN IMAGINATION AND IN VIVO During the final \
stage, clients are encouraged to apply their coping skills on a graduated basis, across \
increasing levels of stressors. Behavioral rehearsal, modeling, and in vivo exposure are \
utilized. A central component of the application phase is relapse prevention. Clients are \
encouraged to explore high-risk situations, to look at how coping might be employed, and \
to view lapses, should they occur, as potential learning opportunities. \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 5-Treatment/ Intervention: Cognitive-Behaviorism \
\
IV. REHM: SELF-CONTROL MODEL OF DEPRESSION \
\
Rehm has proposed a self-control model of depression that attempts to integrate cognitive \
as well as behavioral models of depression. Pure behavioral models of depression propose \
that depression results from too low a rate of response-contingent reinforcement, and that \
depression improves when the rate of reinforcement for adaptive behavior is increased. \
\
While Rehm acknowledges the importance of reinforcement in the development of \
depression, he proposes that reinforcement can be self-generated rather than derived from \
external sources. Rehm views depression and its concomitant low rate of behavior (e.g., \
lack of involvement in activities) as a result of negative self-evaluations, lack of self- \
reinforcement and high rates of self-punishment. \
\
V. MARLATT: RELAPSE PREVENTION \
\
Marlatt is a cognitive-behaviorist who is well known for his model of "relapse prevention." \
Unlike AA and other abstinence based programs, Marlatt views addiction as an overlearned \
habit, and attempts to minimize the effects of relapses by teaching recovering addicts to \
view relapses as inevitable experiences. Instead of viewing recovery as all or nothing, and \
a relapse as due to lack of motivation or as a failure, the client is assisted to view each \
setback as a lapse to be learned from. \
\
Part of Marlatt's model also includes assisting addicts to identify the triggers for relapse, \
which may involve external factors, interpersonal situations, or internal states such as \
thoughts, feelings, or physiological sensations. The most common relapse trigger is thought \
to be the client's negative emotional state. The client is then assisted to develop new skills \
or behaviors for dealing with triggers (e.g., talking to a friend instead of using drugs). \
\
VI. LINEHAN'S DIALECTICAL BEHAVIOR THERAPY \
\
Marsha Linehan's Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) is a structured outpatient therapy \
program for persons with borderline personality disorder. The dialectical point of view \
underlies the therapy, with the key dialectic being "acceptance" on the one hand and \
"change" on the other. The therapy is behavioral, and although the past is not ignored, the \
therapy focuses on present behavior and the current factors that are controlling that \
behavior. \
\
\
\
                             Section 5 -Treatment/ Intervention: Cognitive-Behaviorism \
\
Therapy requires that the client agree to the following four conditions: to work in therapy \
for a specified period (typically one year) and within reason to attend all sessions; if \
suicidal behavior is present, to work on reducing this; to work on any behaviors that \
interfere with the course of therapy (therapy-interfering behaviors); and to attend skills \
training. \
\
The primary modes of treatment in DBT include individual therapy, telephone contact, \
group skills training, and therapist consultation. \
\
>INDIVIDUAL THERAPY The individual therapist is the primary therapist, with the \
main work of therapy being carried out during these sessions. \
\
>TELEPHONE CONTACT   Telephone contact is used to provide the client help and \
support in applying skills learned between sessions, and to help find ways of avoiding self- \
injury. \
\
>SKILLS TRAINING Skills training is carried out in the group context, typically with \
someone other than the individual therapist. The four groups of skills focused on are: core \
mindfulness skills (the ability to stay in the present moment), interpersonal effectiveness \
skills, emotion regulation skills, and distress tolerance skills. \
\
>THERAPIST CONSULTATION   Therapists are required to receive DBT from each \
other at regular therapist consultation groups. \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 5-Treament/ Intervention: Classical Psychoanalysts \
\
       5.3 CLASSICAL PSYCHOANALYSIS \
\
Freud's view of human nature is basically deterministic. Specifically, he posits that \
behavior is determined by irrational forces, unconscious motivations, biological and \
instinctual drives, and psychosexual events of the first six years of life. \
\
A. PERSONALITY STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONING \
\
Freud divided the structure of personality into three parts: the id, ego, and the superego. \
\
>THE ID The id is the most primitive part of the psyche. It is ruled by the instincts, or \
basic biological drives, which include libido (also called eros or the life instincts), and \
aggression (also called thanatos or the death instincts). Believed to be present at birth, the \
id is largely unconscious, lacks organization, and disregards reality. The id operates on the \
pleasure principle, which seeks immediate gratification without concern about long-term \
consequences. Evidence for unconscious id impulses can be found in dreams, slips of the \
tongue, jokes, and free association. \
\
>THE EGO The ego is the part of the psyche that is modified by interaction with the \
external world. The ego operates on the reality principle (awareness of the real world and \
consequences of behavior) and is able to defer immediate gratification in order to obtain \
greater long-term gratification. The ego can be seen as the "executive," controlling \
consciousness and psychic functions. Its main task, according to classical psychoanalysis, \
is to suspend or satisfy the id impulses using means that are rational, socially acceptable, \
and reasonably safe. \
\
>THE SUPEREGO The superego includes the individual's conscience, moral code, and \
internalized parental and societal standards. The superego forces the ego to satisfy the id \
in a manner that is moral and ethical, according to an internalized set of rules about what \
is good and bad. The weapon of the superego is guilt. The superego embodies the ideal. \
the standard of perfection and is believed to evolve as the child successfully passes through \
the Oedipal stage. \
\
\
\
                            Section 5 -Treatment/ Intervention: Classical Psychoanalysis \
\
Freud delineated two kinds of mental functioning. \
\
>PRIMARY PROCESS     Examples of primary process include dreams and \
hallucinations. The chief characteristic of primary process functioning is an urgent attempt \
at tension reduction, even at the expense of reality. \
\
>SECONDARY PROCESS     Secondary process includes thinking and speaking. \
Secondary process is characterized by a focus on meeting the demands of reality and by \
the ability to delay gratification. \
\
B. ANXIETY AND THE DEFENSE MECHANISMS \
\
Freud believed that neurotic anxiety results when the unacceptable urges of the id become \
too strong to be controlled by the ego, and these impulses begin to edge their way into \
consciousness. At this point, the ego is unable to control the anxiety by rational methods \
and therefore resorts to the ego-defense mechanisms. The specific purpose of the defense \
mechanisms is to prevent the id's forbidden impulses from entering consciousness. \
\
Defense mechanisms work through self-deception and distortion of reality so that the id's \
urges will not have to be acknowledged. The predominant defense mechanisms include: \
repression, regression, projection, displacement, reaction formation, and sublimation. \
\
>REPRESSION Repression is the most basic and commonly used defense mechanism, \
and is believed to underlie all the other defenses. Repression involves forcing disturbing \
impulses out of consciousness. Freud also referred to repression as motivated forgetting. \
\
>REGRESSION Regression involves guarding against anxiety by retreating to behaviors \
of an earlier, less demanding and safer stage of development. \
\
>PROJECTION Projection involves seeing one's unconscious urges (e.g., hostility) in \
another person's behavior. A common outcome is suspicion and paranoia. \
\
>DISPLACEMENT Displacement involves the transference of emotions from the \
original object to some substitute or symbolic representation. Displacement can be a factor \
in phobias. For example, the person who is scared of sex displaces the fear onto snakes and \
develops a snake phobia. \
\
\
 \
\
                            Section 5 -Treatment/ Intervention: Classical Psychoanalysis \
\
>REACTION FORMATION Reaction formation involves engaging in behaviors that \
are the exact opposite of the id's real urges. For example, the mother who has aggressive \
feelings toward her child becomes a doting and overprotective mother. \
\
>INTELLECTUALIZATION   Intellectualization involves distancing the self from \
one's feelings. \
\
>RATIONALIZATION Rationalization involves coming up with self-satisfying, yet \
incorrect reasons for one's behavior. \
\
>SUBLIMATION Sublimation involves finding socially acceptable ways of discharging \
energy from unconscious forbidden desires. A classic example is the individual with a \
desire to smear feces becoming a painter. Sublimation is thought to be not only normal, but \
also desirable. \
\
According to Theodore Millon each personality disorder relies on one primary defense as \
follows: \
\
Schizoid: intellectualization \
Narcissistic: rationalization \
Paranoid: projection \
Borderline: regression \
Histrionic: dissociation \
Dependent: introjection \
Antisocial: acting out \
\
Some theorists argue that people with personality disorders use alloplastic defenses \
whereas neurotic people use autoplastic defenses. Alloplastic reactions to stress involve \
trying to change the external environment or blaming the external environment, as is \
typical of people with Borderline Personality Disorder or Narcissistic Personality Disorder. \
Autoplastic reactions to stress involve trying to change oneself or blaming oneself, as is \
typical of people with Major Depression or anxiety. Hint: "alloplastic" means other ("allo") \
and changing ("plastic"), and "autoplastic" means oneself ("auto") and changing \
("plastic"). \
\
\
\
                            Section 5-Treatment/ Intervention: Classical Psychoanalysts \
\
C. TREATMENT AND TECHNIQUES \
\
The focus in classical analysis is on making the unconscious conscious, specifically, \
bringing to light the conflicts between the id's impulses that are pressing for discharge, and \
the efforts to repress these impulses by the ego defenses. \
\
The cornerstone of psychoanalysis is free association. The process of treatment includes \
four steps: clarification, confrontation, interpretation, and working through. The analysis \
of dreams is also a significant aspect of treatment, Transference and countertransference \
are important in analytic work, with transference (both negative and positive) seen as a \
form of resistance that must be worked through. \
\
\
 \
\
                           Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Extensions of Psychoanalysts \
\
    5.4 EXTENSIONS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS/ \
      PSYCHODYNAMIC INTERVENTIONS \
\
Those who have expanded on classical psychoanalysis include the ego psychologists, the \
object relations theorists, the self-psychologists, and the psychoanalytic social \
psychologists (the neo-Freudians). Those who have departed from classical analysis \
include Adler (Individual Psychology) and Jung (Analytical Psychology). \
\
I. EGO PSYCHOLOGY \
\
Ego psychologists focus on the ego's capacity for integration and adaptation. Ego \
psychology represents a transition from the theory of the ego as helpless rider of the id \
horse, to the ego as guiding a person's capacity to master life. \
\
The major ego psychologists include Heinz Hartmann, Anna Freud, and Erik Erikson. \
\
A. HEINZ HARTMANN \
\
Hartmann is known as "the father of ego psychology." He believed that the ego did not \
arise out of the id, but in parallel with it, and therefore concluded that people are not only \
driven by their passions, but also by their thinking. Hartmann differentiated between \
defensive ego functions and ego autonomous functions. He coined the term "conflict-free \
sphere" for those ego functions occurring and developing outside of conflict, including the \
functions of perception, learning, memory, and locomotion. \
\
B. ANNA FREUD \
\
Anna Freud described the ego's capacity for mastery by noting the ego's inherent ability \
to reconcile drive conflicts with the demands of reality. Anna Freud saw the ego as a \
medium through which we can get a fuller picture of the id and superego. \
\
Along with Melanie Klein, Anna Freud is known for her pioneering work in applying \
psychoanalysis with children. Unlike Klein, Anna Freud did not interpret the play of her \
child clients, but rather she interpreted their words. Also, unlike Klein, she attempted to \
\
\
\
                           Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Extensions of Psychoanalysts \
\
form a strong positive bond with her child clients at the outset of treatment, rather than \
remaining neutral. \
\
C. ERIK ERIKSON \
\
Erikson combined ego psychology with psychosocial life span theory. His theory is based \
on the premise that development occurs in response to social crises. Erikson believed the \
ego matures in epigenetic sequences, in which development occurs in a series of stages \
built on mastery of prior stages. \
\
Freud had delineated five psychosexual stages: oral, anal, phallic, latency, and genital. In \
contrast, Erik Erikson posited eight stages of ego development. The first five correspond \
in time to Freud's, but Erikson went on to include stages of adult ego development. \
Whereas Freud interpreted human behavior as a clash between the unconscious id and the \
conscious ego and superego, Erikson described human behavior as an interaction between \
the internal world of the psyche (ego, id, and superego) and the external social world. \
Erikson's contributions are further described in the Developmental section. \
\
II. OBJECT RELATIONS THEORY \
\
Object relations theory deals with the capacity to have mutually satisfying interpersonal \
relationships. The term object refers to the relationship of the infant to another person. \
Freud believed that the infant's early interest in the mother was solely due to her ability to \
satisfy the drive of hunger. In contrast, object relations theorists believe that the child is \
"object-related" from birth; in other words, there is an inherent drive for satisfying object \
relationships that is as fundamental to humans as the need for food. Early object \
relationships are thought to have a profound impact on personality development. \
\
The object relations theorists focus on therapy as an opportunity to experience object \
relations that differ from those experienced as a child. The focus is on integrating split-off \
parts of the self and integrating the good and bad into whole object representations, thereby \
attaining object constancy. Therapists help clients differentiate a clear sense of self, and \
form balanced, realistic attitudes towards others. In treatment, the therapist plays an active \
role and avoids the "blank screen" invisibility of classical analysis. Major object relations \
theorists include Klein, Winnicott, and Mahler. \
\
\
 \
\
                           Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Extensions of Psychoanalysts \
\
A. MELANIE KLEIN \
\
Klein described splitting as a major defense mechanism used when the infant has hostile \
feelings toward a loved object. Out of fear that the hostile feelings could destroy the loved \
object, the infant "splits" the loved object into two, for example the "good breast" which \
is available, soothing and nourishing, and the "bad breast" which is unavailable or \
withholding. The infant then invests the "good breast" with all its loving feelings and \
invests the "bad breast" with all its destructive feelings. Splitting prevents object constancy \
(recognizing the breast as one object with both good and bad capacities). \
\
Melanie Klein worked a great deal with children. She saw play as the child's free \
association and conducted child therapy in a manner very similar to adult analysis. \
\
B. WINNICOTT \
\
D. W. Winnicott discussed the importance of being a "good enough mother," rather than a \
perfect one. He described pathology as resulting from abandoning one's true self and \
adopting a "false self," in other words, disavowing one's inner feelings and behaving in \
ways that are acceptable to others. He also highlighted the importance of the transitional \
object, which serves as a link between developing children and their mothers (e.g., a child's \
favorite blanket or doll). \
\
C. MARGARET MAHLER \
\
Mahler developed a theory that describes the processes of separation and individuation. \
Mahler described six stages of development. These include normal infantile autism, \
symbiosis, differentiation, practicing, rapprochement, and object constancy. (These phases \
are described in greater detail in the Developmental section.) \
\
Separation is the process of becoming a discrete physical entity by physically distancing, \
while individuation is the process of becoming a psychologically independent person, \
which involves maturation of independent ego functions. \
\
III. KOHUT: SELF PSYCHOLOGY \
\
Whereas Freud focused on libidinal development (e.g., the psychosexual stages) as the key \
to understanding the infant's development, Kohut suggested that there was another line of \
development, the development of narcissism. He focused on the earliest stages of a child's \
\
\
\
                           Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Extensions of Psychoanalysis \
\
life, the "pre-oedipal stages." Unlike Freud who saw all narcissism as an unhealthy \
secondary reaction, Kohut posited a "primary narcissism," a healthy kind of narcissism that \
occurs when a baby naturally focuses on getting its own needs met. With appropriate \
caretaking that satisfies "selfobject" needs, the baby develops a healthy self with \
appropriate and healthy narcissism. Selfobject needs include mirroring (approval and \
admiration of the baby), idealizing (the presence of adults worthy of idealization), and \
twinship (the ability to join in with and imitate adults, like a toddler pretending to shave \
when his father does). \
\
Clinically, self-psychologists focus on "empathic attunement" with clients and prefer \
interpretations that are "experience near" rather than "experience distant" (such as those in \
classical psychoanalysis). \
\
IV. NEO-FREUDIANS \
\
The neo-Freudians focused on the impact of social and cultural factors in determining \
personality. They believed that psychological disturbance results from faulty learning and \
involves a characterologically maladaptive style of interacting with the environment. \
\
Psychotherapy is seen as an interpersonal experience in which the therapist can help the \
client examine difficulties in relating to people. The treatment relationship is used to \
facilitate the process of identifying and correcting clients' tendencies to misperceive or \
misinterpret the behavior of others. Major neo-Freudians include Sullivan, Horney, and \
Fromm. \
\
A. HARRY STACK SULLIVAN \
\
Sullivan is known for interpersonal theory. He believed that personality exists only in an \
emotional exchange between people. He argued that the person does not possess a \
personality as much as reflect one in responding to the perception of significant others. \
\
Sullivan drew significantly from Piaget's theory of cognitive development, especially with \
regard to the first two years of life, and specifically about the child's development of \
concepts of causality and experiences of reality. He conceived of three modes of existence, \
the prototaxic, the parataxic, and the syntaxic. \
\
>PROTOTAXIC The prototaxic mode (birth to seven months) involves serial sensation \
and a stream of sensory experiences that are isolated and uncoordinated with one another. \
\
\
 \
\
                           Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Extensions of Psychoanalysis \
\
>PARATAXIC The parataxic mode (8 - 11 months) involves sequential sensations, and \
the dominance of temporal sequence serves as the only conception of causality. To \
Sullivan, transference is an example of a parataxic distortion. \
\
>SYNTAXIC The syntaxic mode (12 months - 2 years) involves causal sensation, logical \
and analytical thinking, and ability to predict cause from knowledge of their effects. \
\
Based in large part on Sullivan's work, interpersonal therapy (IPT) has been developed. \
Considered to be an evidence-based treatment for depression, Interpersonal Therapy (IPT) \
is a 16-session, time-limited therapy model that connects the client's presenting problem \
to interpersonal difficulties. Interpersonal therapy is focused on the here-and-now, on \
current interpersonal relationships, rather than on past conflicts or relationships. One of \
four interpersonal problem areas is commonly targeted: grief, role dispute, role transition, \
or interpersonal deficits. Interpersonal therapy attempts to foster a positive therapeutic \
alliance. The transference relationship is not interpreted, nor are other traditional \
psychodynamic techniques utilized. \
\
B. KAREN HORNEY \
\
Horney believed that neurosis is a culturally defined construct, indicating deviation from a \
common pattern of behavior in a given society. Neurosis develops from the feelings of \
alienation, basic anxiety and basic hostility that result from the child's discovery of \
helplessness in the face of all-powerful, indifferent adults. Basic anxiety results in a rigid \
pursuit of safety, familiarity and security. Horney described three neurotic trends: moving \
compliantly towards others, moving aggressively against others, and moving detachedly \
away from others. \
\
C. ERICH FROMM \
\
Incorporating concepts from Marx and the existentialist philosophers, Fromm viewed \
human's behavior as resulting from sociocultural and economic conditions. He believed \
the experience of freedom frightened most people, hence the title of one of his books, \
Escape from Freedom. He distinguished between two modes of existence, the "having" \
mode and the "being" mode, with the idea that healthier people live primarily in the "being" \
mode. \
\
\
\
                           Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Extensions of Psychoanalysis \
\
V. ADLERIAN PSYCHOLOGY (INDIVIDUAL \
PSYCHOLOGY) \
\
Alfred Adler believed that each person strives for superiority or personal competence, and \
that we struggle not just to survive but to master life. Adler differed with Freud over the \
importance of biological and instinctual determination. While Adler agreed with Freud that \
adults are profoundly influenced by the first six years of life, Adler asserted that humans \
are motivated primarily by social (aggressive) rather than sexual urges. Adler believed our \
happiness or success is largely related to social connectedness and our ability to transcend \
the self. Adler proposed that the more one's lifestyle is connected to struggles for power at \
the expense of social interest, the more likely the person is to engage in maladaptive \
behavior. \
\
Adler believed every child experiences basic feelings of inferiority due to real or perceived \
weaknesses. These inferiority feelings can either motivate mastery or contribute to \
neurosis. Adler argued that neurosis results from a maladaptive effort to compensate for \
feelings of inferiority by adopting a lifestyle (attitudes, aspirations and behavior patterns) \
that is unproductive (e.g., delinquents, psychotics). In general, lifestyle is affected by \
experiences within the family and with siblings, with birth order having significant impact. \
\
In Adlerian therapy, interpretation is a significant therapeutic tool, but what is selected for \
interpretation is quite dissimilar from Freud's genetic interpretations and Jung's \
elaboration of symbolic meaning. In therapy, Adlerians looks for mistaken goals and faulty \
assumptions. Adlerian therapists also focus on encouraging the client because they believe \
most clients are suffering from a sense of discouragement and demoralization. Adlerians \
stress analysis of clients' current concerns and future goals rather than past conflicts. Such \
an emphasis indicates a teleological view of behavior, meaning that behavior is seen as \
determined by the future rather than the past. \
\
Adlerian therapy involves a pragmatic, problem-solving approach, and is characterized by \
an educational process in which the therapist tries to influence clients to form more positive \
attitudes toward themselves and others, and to adopt more effective and socially acceptable \
patterns of living. \
\
There have been significant applications of Adler's work to education and parenting. The \
well-known STEP program (Systematic Training in Effective Parenting) advocates a \
democratic approach to parenting that values and respects the child's contribution. It \
recommends using natural and logical consequences of behavior as the basis of discipline. \
\
\
 \
\
                           Section 5 - Treatment Intervention: Extensions of Psychoanalysis \
\
It also encourages parents to understand their child's misbehavior as reflecting one of four \
mistaken goals (attention, power, revenge, giving up). \
\
VI. JUNGIAN PSYCHOLOGY (ANALYTIC PSYCHOLOGY) \
\
According to Jung, the structure of the psyche includes the conscious ego, the personal \
unconscious (similar to Freud's unconscious), and the collective unconscious. He \
described the collective unconscious as transpersonal or impersonal. Within the collective \
unconscious are the archetypes, which are primordial images and ideas that have been \
inherited, and that are common to all members of the race from the beginning of life. Some \
of the archetypes include the persona (social mask), the shadow (one's hidden aspects), the \
anima (female aspect), and the animus (male aspect). The self is the transcendent part of \
the psyche that encompasses all of the archetypes and components. \
\
Jung believed that neurosis represents the struggle of people to free themselves from the \
interference of the archetypes with their progress toward personality integration and \
fulfillment of their potential. Neurosis is seen not so much as illness but as a striving toward \
psychological maturity, which is termed individuation. Jung's analytical therapy is \
teleological, meaning that behavior is seen as determined by the future rather than the past. \
\
The task of the Jungian therapist is to utilize interpretation to help the client gain awareness \
of the unconscious, with a particular focus on the symbolic meaning of dreams, myths and \
folklore. The therapist's role involves an active effort to guide the client into a productive \
relationship with the elements of the unconscious and thereby liberate growth-promoting \
forces within the personality. Treatment methods are characterized by direct focusing of \
the sessions rather than free association, and an exchange of ideas at the level of a real \
relationship rather than utilizing the transference. Jungians see transference as a projection \
of the personal and/or collective unconscious. \
\
In contrast to Freud's emphasis on infantile development, Jung was much more focused on \
the process of adult development. In fact, as initially practiced by Jung, therapy was \
reserved for adults. Today, however, Jungian therapy is widely used with children as well \
(e.g., using sand trays). \
\
\
\
                            Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Humanism/Existentialism \
\
     5.5 THERAPIES AND INTERVENTIONS \
  BASED ON HUMANISM/ EXISTENTIALISM \
\
The humanists and existentialists both emphasize the client's subjective experiences. These \
therapists subscribe to a phenomenological approach, which requires the therapist to enter \
the client's subjective world. Humanism and existentialism both trust in the client's \
capacity to make positive and constructive conscious choices. The emphasis is on freedom, \
choice, autonomy, purpose, and meaning, and the focus is on the present. \
\
Humanist psychologists believe that people move in the direction of actualization if \
nurtured. A key figure in humanist psychology, Maslow believed we all have the potential \
to proceed through a hierarchy of basic needs towards ultimate health and a fully \
spontaneous expression of the self, called self-actualization. \
\
In contrast, existentialist psychologists believe that we have no internal nature, that the \
world lacks intrinsic meaning, and that people are faced with what to make of this \
meaninglessness. The existentialists were influenced by philosophers, including \
Dostoyevsky, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Sartre, and Buber. Key existentialist \
psychologists include Binswanger, Boss, Viktor Frankl, R. D. Laing, Rollo May and Irving \
Yalom. \
\
Therapies based on humanism/existentialism include Client-Centered Therapy (Carl \
Rogers), Gestalt Therapy (Fritz Perls), and Reality Therapy (Glasser). \
\
I. ROGERS: CLIENT/PERSON-CENTERED THERAPY \
\
Client-Centered Therapy rests on the premise that all people have inborn capacities for \
purposive, goal-directed behavior, and, if free of adverse conditions, will develop into self- \
accepting, kind, socialized persons. Faulty learning, however, can cause people to become \
hateful, self-centered, ineffective and antagonistic. Pathology or problems are thought to \
be due to incongruence between the self (true feelings) and experience (ability to be aware \
of these feelings and express them to others). The focus of therapy is on correcting faulty \
learning by providing clients with an opportunity to expand their awareness of and liking \
for themselves. \
\
\
 \
\
                            Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Humanism/Existentialism \
\
Central to this approach is the concept of the phenomenal self, the private world of \
experience and meaning. Rogers believed that a person's behavior can be understood only \
from the person's own subjective point of view and can be changed only by the \
determination to change. Client-Centered Therapy therefore does not offer direct \
suggestion or make interpretations. Rather, the therapist creates an accepting, non- \
threatening atmosphere in which clients can examine and reconsider their ways of thinking \
and feeling. \
\
The client-centered therapist listens in a friendly and empathic manner, reflects clients' \
feeling tone, and encourages clients to manage their own affairs. The therapist thus makes \
it possible for clients to grow through the relationship. to form a more positive view of \
themselves, and to direct themselves toward more productive and self-actualizing patterns \
of behavior. The overall focus of treatment is on clarifying feelings, without judging them \
or elaborating upon them. \
\
The three key characteristics of treatment are empathy, warmth, and genuineness. \
\
>EMPATHY Accurate empathic understanding is the means by which a therapist conveys \
to a client that he or she is being listened to and understood. It involves being sensitive to \
the client's subjective experiences and needs and appreciating distress and difficulties. \
\
>WARMTH Warmth, or unconditional positive regard and acceptance, consists of the \
therapist valuing the client as an individual in his or her own right, refraining from passing \
judgment, maintaining a consistently friendly attitude, and conveying a strong sense of \
caring and commitment. \
\
>GENUINENESS Genuineness or congruence of the therapist involves the therapist \
being truthful and authentic, and saying only what he or she believes, and doing only what \
is comfortable. \
\
II. PERLS: GESTALT THERAPY \
\
In developing Gestalt Therapy, Perls drew on the findings of Gestalt Theory, according to \
which people structure experiences as whole, integrated organisms, not in cognitive or \
affective fragments. Perceptions consist of gestalts which are combinations of figure (what \
is attended to) and ground (what is ignored). Healthy functioning results when individuals \
are able to maintain flexible and adaptive contact with their own needs and with their \
environment. Without this, there can result personality fragmentation, limited awareness, \
and deficiencies in responsibility, authenticity, and self-regulation. \
\
\
\
                            Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Humanism/Existentialism \
\
The focus of therapy is on the client becoming aware of the whole personality by \
discovering those aspects of the self that are blocked from awareness. By reowning parts \
that have been disowned, the client is thus able to achieve integration. An overall goal of \
treatment is to enhance the individual's capacity to communicate or make contact with the \
self and others. \
\
Resistances to contact or boundary disturbances, as described by Polster and Polster, \
include introjection, projection, retroflection, deflection and confluence. \
\
>INTROJECTION Introjection is a process whereby people take information in whole, \
which results in problems with being overly compliant and gullible. \
\
>PROJECTION Projection is a process by which people project their feelings onto \
others, which results in paranoia. \
\
>RETROFLECTION Retroflection is a process in which people turn back onto the self \
what they would like to do to others. This can result in self-destructive behavior. \
\
>DEFLECTION Deflection is a process by which people distance themselves from their \
feelings through distraction, humor, generalization, and asking questions rather than \
making statements. \
\
>CONFLUENCE Confluence involves a lack of awareness of a differentiation between \
the self and others, in an attempt to avoid conflicts. \
\
Gestalt Therapy is active and focuses on awareness, experience and affective expression, \
rather than on a cognitive analysis of behavior. More so than in other humanistic \
approaches, Gestalt therapy uses a variety of specific and graded exercises to facilitate \
experiencing and self-expression. \
\
The empty chair technique involves clients playing out their fantasies, by taking on both \
sides of their conflicts. It may also involve pretending to speak to an individual for whom \
clients have unresolved feelings. With dreams, Gestalt therapists have the client become \
the different parts of the dream. Given their here-and-now orientation, Gestalt therapists \
actively challenge the transference (e.g., they bring the focus back to the present), and also \
discourage questions. \
\
\
 \
\
                            Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Humanism/Existentialism \
\
III. GLASSER: REALITY THERAPY \
\
Reality Therapy has been influenced by both existentialism and REBT. The key feature of \
Reality Therapy is responsibility. Treatment focuses on clarifying clients' values and \
helping clients evaluate their current behavior and plans in relation to these values. The \
end goal is to get clients to accept responsibility. \
\
A key element of reality therapy is Choice Theory (previously known as Control Theory), \
which proposes that we create an inner world that satisfies our needs, one that does not \
necessarily reflect the real world. Our behavior is an attempt to control our perceptions of \
the external world to fit our internal "need-satisfying" world. It is argued that all behaviors \
are generated from within and people have choices in what they do. \
\
Therapy consists of helping the person perceive the consequences of possible courses of \
action and decide on realistic solutions or goals. Once a plan of action is chosen, a contract \
may be signed. Other therapy components may include the use of humor, paradox, and \
skillful questioning. \
\
Reality Therapy has been widely implemented with clinical populations, such as juvenile \
delinquents and prison inmates. Schools Without Failures (SWF) is a program based on \
Glasser's work that has been used in high schools to reduce dropout rates. \
\
\
\
                                Section 5- Treatment/Intervention: Other Approaches \
\
5.6 OTHER MISCELLANEOUS APPROACHES \
\
I. BERNE: TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS (TA) \
\
Transactional Analysis (TA) is rooted in an anti-deterministic philosophy. The goal is for \
clients to become aware of the intent behind their communication, and to eliminate deceit \
so that clients can interpret their own behavior accurately. TA looks at early decisions a \
person has made and the capacity to make new decisions. Key concepts include the ego \
states, transactions, games, strokes, and life scripts. \
\
>EGO STATES The three ego states of parent, adult, and child are components of the \
personality. \
\
>TRANSACTIONS Transactions are interactions between the ego states of two persons. \
Transactions occur at two levels, the social (or overt) level, and the psychological (or \
covert) level. Transactions can be complementary (e.g., adult to adult), crossed (e.g., one \
person communicates adult to adult, while the other responds from child to parent), or \
ulterior (e.g., dual levels of transactions occurring simultaneously, one overt and the other \
covert). \
\
>GAMES A game is an orderly series of ulterior transactions, which commonly ends in \
bad feelings for both players. \
\
>STROKES Strokes are the recognition given to a person. Strokes can be either positive \
(caring and approving) or negative (damaging and disapproving). \
\
>LIFE SCRIPTS Life scripts are patterns that have developed that virtually dictate one's \
life. Out of their own pain, parents give the child messages (injunctions) about how he or \
she must behave in order to receive recognition (strokes). These injunctions result in early \
decisions made by the child which then guide adult development and behavior. \
\
TA techniques include structural analysis (becoming aware of the parent, adult, and child). \
transactional analysis (looking at communication patterns between the person and others), \
analysis of games, and script analysis. \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Other Approaches \
\
II. HYPNOTHERAPY \
\
Hypnosis is defined as a state or condition in which the person is able to respond to \
suggestions by experiencing alterations of perceptions, memory, or mood. The essential \
feature is a subjective experiential change. Hypnosis is also called an altered state of \
consciousness, or a dissociated state. \
\
People who have been hypnotized enter a trance state, which can range from light to deep. \
In a light trance changes in motor activity can occur. For example, muscles may relax, \
hands may levitate, and paresthesias (or tingling) can be induced. Characteristic of a \
medium trance include decreased pain sensation and partial or complete amnesia. During \
a deep trance, deep anesthesia as well as visual and auditory experiences can be induced. \
Also associated with a deep trance is the capacity for post-hypnotic suggestion. Regardless \
of the depth of the trance, a hypnotized person will not follow a command if it is something \
she or he does not want to do. \
\
Hypnosis is used for treating chronic pain, asthma, conversion symptoms, and substance \
use. Persons who are not good candidates include individuals with paranoia or obsessive- \
compulsive disorder. \
\
Hypnosis is often used to aid memory. Research has indicated, however, that hypnotized \
individuals report more false memories than true ones. In addition, a person under hypnosis \
is more likely to reconstruct false memories to fill in memory gaps than would a non- \
hypnotized individual being asked similar questions. \
\
Ericksonian hypnotherapy is a specific type of hypnotherapy that involves techniques that \
rely on psycholinguistic nuances as well as relaxation and focus during trance. This \
approach depends more on subtleties of communication than on formal induction of a \
trance. Therapy is manipulative, controlling, and paradoxical at times. \
\
III. BIOFEEDBACK \
\
Biofeedback involves operant conditioning of normally involuntary autonomie nervous \
system (ANS) functions, with the goal of alleviating symptoms. By means of visual and \
auditory displays, the client is given feedback about the status of certain involuntary \
biological functions and is then taught to regulate one or more of these biological states. \
The mechanism of action involves decreased sympathetic arousal. \
\
\
\
                               Section 5- Treatment/Intervention: Other Approaches \
\
Biofeedback is commonly utilized in conjunction with relaxation training. The specific \
type of biofeedback (and relaxation training) selected depends on the client and the nature \
of the problem. Commonly used biofeedback procedures include thermal biofeedback, \
EMG, EEG, and GSR. \
\
>THERMAL BIOFEEDBACK Thermal (temperature) biofeedback measures peripheral \
skin temperature and is commonly used to treat migraine headaches and Reynaud's disease. \
The goal of biofeedback is for the client to be able to increase peripheral temperature. \
Thermal biofeedback is commonly combined with autogenie training (a specific type of \
relaxation training that focuses on warmth and heaviness). \
\
>ELECTROMYOGRAPHY (EMG) EMG measures surface muscle tension (e.g., the \
forehead, jaw, lower back). EMG biofeedback is commonly used to treat clients with \
tension headaches, temporomandibular joint pain (TMJ), and back pain, with the goal of \
either reducing EMG levels, or equalizing the tension in parallel muscle groups (e.g., of \
the lower back). EMG biofeedback is commonly combined with progressive or passive \
muscle relaxation training. EMG is also used for clients requiring neuromuscular \
rehabilitation (e.g., secondary to stroke). \
\
>ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY (EEG) EEG measures brain waves and is used to \
treat people suffering from hyperactivity or seizure disorders. \
\
>GALVANIC SKIN RESPONSE (GSR) GSR, also called electrodermal response \
(EDR), measures skin conductivity or sweat. GSR (in combination with relaxation training) \
can be used in the treatment of generalized anxiety. The goal is to decrease GSR levels. \
\
The research contrasting the effectiveness of biofeedback for different disorders has been \
somewhat inconsistent. EMG biofeedback for tension headaches and thermal biofeedback \
for migraine are both effective treatments. Overall, however, there is some evidence that \
EMG biofeedback is more effective for tension headaches as compared to thermal \
biofeedback for migraines. \
\
IV. FEMINIST THERAPY \
\
Feminist therapists promote independence and autonomy. They do not attempt to bond \
with their clients to avoid fostering dependence. They view sexism as an underlying cause \
of problems and don't focus on "pathology" as such. For example, a feminist therapist \
would probably not diagnose a client with a major depressive disorder, but rather would \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 5- Treatment/Intervention: Other Approaches \
\
reframe the depressive symptoms as a response to sex roles, sexism, or the oppressive \
socio-political climate. \
\
Feminist therapists strive for an egalitarian relationship with their clients and make \
appropriate self-disclosing statements about their own experiences of overcoming \
oppression and striving for autonomy; therefore, they serve as role models for their clients. \
In addition, feminist therapists can be distinguished from nonsexist therapists by the fact \
that feminist therapists advocate for socio-political change. \
\
V. PROCHASKA'S TRANSTHEORETICAL MODEL OF \
BEHAVIOR CHANGE \
\
According to the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change, people progress through a \
series of stages when making changes in their behavior. This model has been used in the \
treatment of addictive behaviors such as smoking and drinking, eating disorders, and \
weight management, and has also been used to promote health-related behaviors. The five \
stages of change in this model are: precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action. \
and maintenance. \
\
>PRECONTEMPLATION In the precontemplation stage, individuals do not believe \
they have a problem. Typically, defenses have been constructed that aid in denial of the \
problem. There is no intention to change behavior during this stage. \
\
>CONTEMPLATION In the contemplation stage, individuals begin to acknowledge \
having a problem and may increase awareness and knowledge related to the problem. The \
contemplation stage is marked by ambivalence. During this stage, no attempts to change \
are made, nor is there even a commitment to change. \
\
>PREPARATION In this stage individuals have developed a commitment to change and \
begin to construct a detailed plan for change. By the time they reach this stage, individuals \
begin to perceive greater benefits than barriers to change. \
\
>ACTION During this stage, behavior change is initiated. Others are likely to recognize \
a person's progress toward change. After at least six months in the action stage, the person \
may move into the fifth and final stage. \
\
>MAINTENANCE   In the final stage of maintenance, individuals take steps to prevent \
relapse and to maintain the gains made during the action stage. \
\
\
\
                               Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Other Approaches \
\
VI. MOTIVATIONAL INTERVIEWING \
\
Developed by Miller and Rollnick, Motivational Interviewing (MI) is a counseling \
approach that helps clients resolve ambivalence about change. With its emphasis on \
enhancing internal motivational processes, it differs sharply from older approaches that \
relied on direct confrontation and the breaking down of defenses. Applications of \
Motivational Interviewing, including Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET), have \
been empirically validated for use with substance abuse, health-promotion behaviors, \
medical adherence, and mental health issues. \
\
VII. FIVE-FACTOR THEORY OF PERSONALITY \
(THE "BIG 5" MODEL) \
\
Costa and McCrae (1985) reanalyzed all previous research on personality. Utilizing factor \
analysis on a long list of personality traits, they arrived at five basic personality traits: \
openness to experience (O), conscientiousness (C), extroversion (E), agreeableness (A), \
and neuroticism (N), forming the acronym OCEAN. On each of these factors, individuals \
are scored from low to high. \
\
>OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE High scorers on this factor are open to new ideas, \
curious, and imaginative. Low scorers are conventional, have narrow interests, and tend to \
be inartistic. \
\
>CONSCIENTIOUSNESS    At the high end, conscientiousness involves being \
responsible, self-disciplined, organized, and achievement-oriented. At the low end. \
individuals are irresponsible, careless, impulsive, lazy, and undependable. A high degree \
of conscientiousness is the trait that has been most consistently associated with job success. \
\
>EXTROVERSION   High scorers are sociable, outgoing, talkative, fun-loving, and \
affectionate, while low scorers are withdrawn, passive, and reserved. \
\
>AGREEABLENESS   At the high end, individuals are good-natured, gentle, warm. \
trusting, and cooperative. At the opposite end. individuals are irritable, argumentative, \
vindictive, and untrusting. \
\
>NEUROTICISM Individuals who score high are emotionally unstable, insecure, \
anxious, and moody. People who score low are emotionally stable, even-tempered, calm, \
easy-going, and relaxed. \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
              5.7 FAMILY THERAPIES \
\
Overall two theoretical models have influenced family therapists: general systems theory \
and cybernetics. \
\
General systems theory posits that the system is an interaction of component parts, which \
seeks to attain homeostasis. \
\
Cybernetics focuses on the circular nature of feedback loops. Feedback loops can be either \
negative or positive. A negative feedback loop tends to decrease deviation in a system, \
with the end result of maintaining the status quo. The classic example of a negative \
feedback loop is a thermostat, whose function is to minimize changes in temperature. When \
the temperature begins to rise, cooling systems are engaged to bring it back down, and \
when the temperature begins to fall, heating is engaged to bring it back up, thus maintaining \
homeostasis. A positive feedback loop increases deviation or change. A clinical example \
of a positive feedback loop is a marital argument in which the actions of each spouse \
escalate the argument, leading to increasing levels of distress. An example of a negative \
feedback loop is a family returning to its normal healthy functioning after a disruptive life \
event, such as the death of a family member. \
\
Theories of family therapy include psychodynamic, structural, communications, strategic, \
family systems, and behavioral/social learning. \
\
I. PSYCHODYNAMIC FAMILY THERAPY \
\
Psychodynamic family therapy focuses on facilitating individual maturation in the context \
of the family system and on freeing family members from unconscious patterns of anxiety \
and projection rooted in the past. This approach emphasizes helping family members \
clarify communication and honestly admit feelings. \
\
Lidz described two deviant types of marital relationships, marital schism and marital skew, \
which can each lead to impaired parenting and disrupted sex-role learning for the child. \
\
>MARITAL SCHISM   Marital schism involves severe, chronic discord and \
disequilibrium, where threats of separation are common and recurrent. Communication \
centers on power struggles and efforts to avoid facing the schism between the spouses. \
\
\
\
                                Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
Parents tend to seek support from their children and attempt to diminish the worth of the \
other parent in the children's eyes. \
\
>MARITAL SKEW In marital skew, the relationship is not threatened by separation but \
skewed toward meeting the needs of one member at the expense of the needs of others. For \
example, a mother forms an overly close relationship with one child at the expense of the \
other children and her husband. \
\
In both problematic patterns of relationship, there is a failure to develop a reciprocally \
rewarding parental coalition. In both patterns, the parents lack role reciprocity, defined as \
a common understanding and acceptance of each other's roles, goals, and values. Family \
sculpting is a technique that can be used, with the therapist both interpreting the sculpture \
and modifying it in ways to suggest new relationships. \
\
II. OBJECT RELATIONS FAMILY THERAPY \
\
Object relations family therapy is a specific branch of psychodynamic family therapy that \
focuses on the transferences and projections between couples or family members. \
According to this theory, problems are caused when members unconsciously project \
unwanted elements of themselves onto others in the family. As a result of these projections. \
the members experience dissatisfaction and try to change one another. Therapy focuses on \
helping each family member to become aware of what is being projected, and then to \
address these unwanted elements within each person. Framo is well known for conducting \
family-of-origin sessions in which a troubled couple first meets with one spouse's entire \
family-of-origin and then, in a later session, meets with the other spouse's family-of-origin. \
\
III. MINUCHIN: STRUCTURAL FAMILY THERAPY \
\
According to Minuchin's structural model, the family is viewed as a single, interrelated \
system, which is assessed along a variety of dimensions: the hierarchy of power, the clarity \
and firmness of boundaries, and the significant alliances and splits (subsystems). \
\
In a healthy family, there is a hierarchy with a strong parental coalition on the topmost \
level. Boundaries are clear and firm, yet there is flexibility in the system that allows for \
autonomy and interdependence, individual growth, as well as adaptive restructuring in \
response to changing developmental and environmental demands. By contrast, pathology \
results from structural imbalances such as a malfunctioning hierarchical arrangement, or \
poor boundaries that may be too rigid or too diffuse. Rigid boundaries result in disengaged \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
or emotionally distant relationships, while diffuse boundaries result in enmeshed \
relationships. \
\
Minuchin described three chronic boundary problems: triangulation, detouring, and stable \
coalitions. \
\
>TRIANGULATION In triangulation, a child is caught in the middle of the parents" \
conflict, with each parent demanding that the child side with him or her. Whenever the \
child sides with one parent, he or she is viewed as attacking the other. The child ultimately \
becomes paralyzed. \
\
>DETOURING In detouring, the parents express their distress through one child, who \
becomes the identified client. This serves to create a false sense of harmony between the \
parents, with the parents either blaming the child as the source of the family's problems, \
or uniting to protect the sick, weak child. \
\
>STABLE COALITION In a stable coalition, one parent unites with the child against \
the other parent, in a rigid cross-generational coalition. \
\
The goal of structural family therapy is to unbalance or reorganize the family's structure \
in such a way that dysfunctional elements are removed. The therapist assumes the role of \
an expert, as he or she diagnoses dysfunctional elements and develops interventions to \
correct them. At the outset of therapy with the family, the structural therapist "joins" the \
family, and attempts to understand the family's dynamics by adopting its style of \
interaction. Therapy then focuses on shifting members' positions in order to disrupt \
malfunctioning patterns and to strengthen the parental hierarchy, with the goal of creating \
clear and flexible boundaries. Specific strategies for unbalancing the family's homeostasis \
include the therapist taking sides, blaming, and forming coalitions. \
\
Structural Family Therapy has been demonstrated to be highly effective in the treatment of \
childhood and adolescent problems, such as asthma, diabetes, and anorexia, as well as in \
the treatment of adults with drug addictions. \
\
IV. COMMUNICATIONS FAMILY THERAPY \
\
The communications family therapists include Virginia Satir, Paul Watzlawick, Gregory \
Bateson, Don Jackson, and Jay Haley. Also referred to as the MRI group because of their \
\
\
\
                                Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
work done at the Mental Research Institute in Palo Alto in the 1960s, these family therapists \
have focused on communication and its impact on family functioning. \
\
The MRI group coined the term "double bind." A double bind is a maladaptive \
communication that typically involves at least three elements: an injunction telling the \
person that if they do or don't do something they will be punished; a secondary injunction \
which is generally nonverbal, conflicting with the first at a more abstract level, and also \
enforced by punishment; and a tertiary injunction prohibiting the victim from escaping the \
field (e.g., by not allowing the victim to point out the inconsistency). \
\
An example of a double bind is a hospitalized psychiatric patient who, when visited by his \
mother, puts his arm around her shoulders only to feel her stiffen. When he quickly \
withdraws his arm, the mother comments, "Don't you love me anymore?" When he then \
blushes, she scolds "Dear, you must not be so easily embarrassed and afraid of your \
feelings." The impossible dilemma is that if he shows his love he is wrong, if he withholds \
his love he is wrong, and if he comments on the situation (by blushing) he is wrong. \
\
The MRI group formulated the double bind theory of schizophrenia, which saw double \
binds as contributing to the etiology of the schizophrenia. This theory has not been \
empirically supported. \
\
Communications family therapy addresses communication problems by implementing \
both direct and indirect techniques. Direct techniques include teaching and pointing out \
problematic communication patterns. Indirect techniques include paradoxical interventions \
such as prescribing the symptom. An example of a paradoxical intervention would be \
telling a couple with marital problems to fight at least three hours a day. \
\
V. HALEY: STRATEGIC FAMILY THERAPY \
\
Haley's strategic approach is a combination of Minuchin's structural approach, with a \
focus on hierarchies, and the communications approach, with a focus on family \
communication and interactions. According to Haley, normal family functioning involves \
flexibility, a large behavioral repertoire for problem-solving and life-cycle passage, and \
clear rules governing the family's hierarchy. Pathology results from a malfunctioning \
hierarchy, or triangles and coalitions across the hierarchy. \
\
Haley views the family's presenting problem and symptoms as a communicative act within \
an interactional pattern. Treatment focuses on resolving the presenting problem only. \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
which is defined by behavioral objectives and criteria. Underlying conflicts or pathology \
are not addressed. The focus is on interrupting the rigid feedback cycle and defining a \
clearer hierarchy, utilizing such techniques as paradoxical interventions. Haley was \
influenced by Milton Erickson. \
\
VI. MILAN GROUP: SYSTEMIC FAMILY THERAPY \
\
Systemic Family Therapy is associated with the Milan group (Palazzoli, Boscolo, Cecchin, \
and Prata), which subsequently split up. It involves elements of general systems theory and \
cybernetics (feedback loops), as well as components of strategic theory, such as \
communication, reframing, and paradox. Key aspects of treatment include circular \
questioning and prescription of rituals. \
\
>CIRCULAR QUESTIONING The Milan group noted that families presenting to \
treatment frequently did not function reciprocally, but rather that one subsystem, coalition, \
or individual was trying to establish control over the family. Circular questioning is a \
technique that aims at gathering information (hypothesis formation) and at the same time \
introducing information into the family system. For example, while the therapist maintains \
an attitude of neutrality, each family member is asked in turn to express his or her views \
on the relationships and differences between other family members. Circular questioning \
thus transforms families' ways of thinking from linear and causal to reciprocal and \
interdependent. \
\
>PRESCRIPTION OF RITUALS The purpose of prescribing rituals is to alter the \
family's direction from its current course. Some therapists using this approach tailor rituals \
to the specific needs of each family. Others always prescribe the same ritual which may \
involve parental secrecy and parental outings framed as disappearances. \
\
VII. BOWEN: FAMILY SYSTEMS THERAPY \
\
According to Bowen, healthy families have clearly differentiated family members and \
there is an overall balance of intellectual and emotional forces. By contrast, families with \
pathology function as a single organism and the identified patient is that part of the \
organism through which overt symptoms are expressed. \
\
One central concept in Bowen's theory is the family emotional system (undifferentiated \
family ego mass), which refers to the emotional oneness that exists and shifts about within \
the family in definite patterns of emotional reactivity. According to Bowen's concept of the \
\
\
\
                                Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
multigenerational transmission process, the emotional dysfunction of an individual \
results from emotional processes that have lasted in the family over several generations. \
\
The essential goal of treatment is personal differentiation from the family-of-origin: the \
ability to be one's true self in the face of familial or other pressures that threaten loss of \
love or social position. The family presenting for treatment is assessed on two levels: a) \
the degree of fusion or emotional cutoff, versus the ability to differentiate, and b) the \
analysis of emotional triangles in presenting problems. An emotional triangle is defined \
as a three-party system arranged so that the closeness of two members tends to exclude a \
third. \
\
The role of the therapist is twofold, first to shift the hot triangle, the one that relates to the \
presenting problem, and second, to work with the most psychologically available family \
members, individually if necessary, on achieving enough personal differentiation so that \
the hot triangle doesn't recur. Modification of relationships in the family system occurs \
through de-triangling and repairing of emotional cutoffs. Bowen also originated the \
genogram, a historical survey of the family going back several generations. \
\
VIII. SOLUTION-FOCUSED THERAPY \
\
Solution-focused therapy (also called solution-focused brief therapy or SFBT) has its roots \
in the MRI group and was initially developed by Steve de Shazer. As the name suggests, \
this model encourages clients to focus on their strengths and to identify solutions, either \
ones that have already worked in the past or ones that might work in the future. The model \
is built on the assumption that expectations are very powerful. Therefore, it attempts to set \
up positive expectations in both therapist and client, for example, the expectation that \
problems can be solved quickly and easily. Similar to the MRI approach, this model also \
assumes that a therapist only has to cause a relatively small change in the client because a \
small change usually starts a process that leads to bigger changes. Solution-focused therapy \
is typically very brief-as short as three to four sessions. \
\
Solution-focused therapy is known for its use of several types of questions. First, the \
miracle question asks, "Suppose one night, while you were asleep, there was a miracle \
and this problem was solved. How would you know? What would be different?" Not only \
can this question foster a problem-solving approach, it can also help clients look beyond \
the problem to what they are really wanting. For example, a client who wants help with \
panic attacks realizes that what he really wants is to engage in more fun activities, which \
is something he can start doing even while he still has panic disorder. As a result, the panic \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
attacks become less of an obstacle in his life and may even lessen in severity. Second, the \
exception question asks clients to think about times when they didn't have the problem. \
so that they can discover what they were doing that was effective at that time. This question \
also helps foster a more positive outlook in which the problem is controllable. Finally, the \
scaling question simply asks clients to rate their problem on a scale of 0 to 10 (ten being \
how they will feel the day after the miracle). This question can help highlight small \
improvements and reduce all-or-nothing thinking. \
\
IX. NARRATIVE THERAPY \
\
Originated by Michael White, narrative therapy moves away from a systems view of \
problems. White argues that symptoms do not serve functions, but rather that they oppress \
people. Symptoms are thought to result from clients developing stories that are "problem- \
saturated descriptions," filled with a sense of powerlessness. \
\
White takes a directive role in helping clients to "re-story," by casting their difficulties as \
a "struggle for control" with a symptom. First, the symptom is externalized, as though it \
were an entity separate from the client. For example, a boy who is encopretic comes to call \
his problem "Sneaky Poo." Second, White asks questions to demonstrate "unique \
outcomes"-those successes that have been hidden by the focus on problems. For example, \
the encopretic boy is asked, "Can you recall an occasion when you could have given in to \
Sneaky Poo, but you didn't?" (This question and approach is very similar to the exception \
question in solution-focused therapy.) Finally, as change occurs, new questions are asked \
to strengthen and solidify the success and the new identity that emerges. For example, when \
the boy shares a success, White might ask, "What does this tell you about yourself that is \
important for you to know?" \
\
X. BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE-BEHAVIORAL \
FAMILY THERAPY \
\
According to proponents of the behavioral family therapy model (e.g., Liberman, \
Patterson, and Alexander), normal family functioning results when adaptive behavior is \
rewarded, maladaptive behavior is not reinforced, and the benefits of being a member of \
the family outweigh costs. In troubled families, maladaptive behavior is reinforced by \
family attention, and there are insufficient rewards as well as communication deficits. \
Treatment focuses on concrete, observable behavioral goals. Key interventions include \
changing contingencies of social reinforcement and improving communication. \
\
\
\
                                Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Family Therapies \
\
In cognitive-behavioral family therapy, relationship-related cognitions are seen as the \
underlying cause of the feelings and behavior of family members. Therapists assess the \
cognitive appraisals that family members make of each other, and then intervene to \
promote positive relationship-related cognitions that cause growth and adaptive \
functioning. \
\
XI. MARITAL BEHAVIORAL THERAPY \
\
Most marital behavior therapies share the following goals and techniques. First, a thorough \
behavioral analysis of the couple is completed. Second, positive reciprocity is established, \
which increases the couple's positive and loving behaviors toward each other. Third, \
communication skills are taught, including "I" statements, staying in the present, and \
positive feedback. Fourth, problem-solving skills are improved, including negotiation and \
contingency contracting. \
\
Richard Stuart, one of the pioneers of marital behavior therapy, developed an approach that \
combines operant learning principles with social exchange theory. According to the social \
exchange model, behavior in relationships is maintained by its ratio of costs and benefits. \
The daily and weekly behavioral exchanges that occur between spouses ultimately lead to \
satisfaction or dissatisfaction. This dynamic is addressed directly in therapy through \
contingency contracting, in which each spouse agrees to perform certain behaviors in \
exchange for the other spouse performing certain behaviors, a kind of quid pro quo. \
\
The overall aim of Stuart's therapy is to enhance positive behavioral change. He is \
particularly well known for his technique of caring days: one day of the week, a spouse \
deliberately performs behaviors that have been requested by the other spouse. The requests \
must be positive, specific, "small" (i.e., easily done in one day), and not a focus of current \
marital conflict. This technique is intended to increase positive reciprocity and \
commitment. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 5-Treatment/Intervention: Group Therapy \
\
               5.8 GROUP THERAPY \
\
It is generally believed that a freely interacting process group, with few restrictions, will \
eventually develop into a social microcosm of the participant members. Group provides an \
excellent opportunity for clients to experience multiple simultaneous transferences. Within \
the context of a process group, clients thus have the opportunity to quickly demonstrate \
their interpersonal difficulties and pathology, \
\
According to Yalom, there are twelve distinct factors that contribute to the therapeutic \
benefits of being a part of a group: insight, the instillation of hope, universality, imparting \
information, altruism, corrective recapitulation of the primary family group, development \
of socializing techniques, imitative behavior, interpersonal learning, group cohesiveness, \
catharsis, and existential factors. Yalom contends that catharsis is a necessary but not \
sufficient condition for therapeutic change. There are several factors that Yalom believes \
do not contribute to group therapy's effectiveness, including leadership style, ideological \
school, and confrontation. \
\
Cohesiveness is considered to be the most critical component of successful group therapy. \
Cohesiveness is analogous to the relationship or rapport in individual therapy, and it is \
defined as the attractiveness of the group to its members. Cohesive groups show greater \
acceptance, intimacy and understanding, and also permit greater expression of hostility and \
conflict among members and towards leaders. \
\
The therapists' tasks include shaping the group into a therapeutic social system. Group \
norms are created as a result of explicit and implicit direction from the leaders as well as \
more influential group members. \
\
Yalom has proposed that process groups evolve through three stages. \
\
The initial stage is characterized by attempts of group members to get oriented. \
Participation is hesitant, with the content and communication style of group members being \
stereotyped and restricted. The group discusses topics of little personal significance and \
searches for commonalities. Members give and seek advice. In this stage, group members \
typically talk to the therapists, rather than with one another. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 5-Treatment/Intervention: Group Therapy \
\
The second stage is characterized by conflict among group members, rebellion toward \
group leaders, and attempts at dominance. \
\
If the second stage is successfully negotiated, the group enters the third stage. \
characterized by the development of closeness, intimacy and cohesion. During the third \
stage group members talk freely with one another. \
\
Yalom has proposed that in group therapy, appropriate open conflict or disagreement \
between the leaders is healthy and can be a positive model for group members. \
Additionally, self-disclosure by group leaders is frequently beneficial to group participants. \
\
Selection of members for process-oriented outpatient groups should typically exclude \
individuals who have suffered brain damage, have hypochondriasis, are sociopaths, are \
acutely psychotic, or are actively using drugs and alcohol. Research has demonstrated that \
participants most likely to drop out early include persons who have significant denial, a \
high degree of somatization, lower motivation, severe pathology, lower SES, lower IQ, and \
are generally less likable. Overall, clients with the fewest skills are the most likely to fail \
in groups. \
\
Group composition should ideally consist of members who are heterogeneous in terms of \
conflict, and homogeneous in terms of ego strength. Ideal group size is about seven or \
eight, with an acceptable range of five to ten members. \
\
Conducting group therapy raises ethical issues with regard to confidentiality. While it is \
impossible to mandate and enforce confidentiality, the importance of confidentiality should \
be brought up early on, and members should periodically be reminded of it. Confidentiality \
is enforced on an "honor system." \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 5-Treatment/Intervention: Crisis Intervention \
\
            5.9 CRISIS INTERVENTION \
\
A crisis is an internally experienced, acute disturbance resulting from a person's inability \
to cope with events experienced. Crisis theory centers on the concept of homeostatic \
equilibrium. At equilibrium, the individual is in a relative state of psychosocial balance, \
where the person's usual coping techniques are operating sufficiently to handle daily \
problems. During a crisis, the person is faced with an obstacle that is, for a time, \
insurmountable by the person's customary methods of problem solving. \
\
Caplan has delineated four phases of a typical crisis situation: 1) when the crisis begins, \
the person feels emotional tension and disorganization, and tries to manage the situation \
by previously learned coping mechanisms; 2) these coping efforts fail to resolve the \
problem and further disorganization occurs; 3) there is a greatly increased tension level \
with further mobilization of internal and outside resources, perhaps help-seeking and/or a \
change of direction and goals; and 4) if these intensified efforts fail to resolve the crisis, \
extensive personality disorganization and emotional breakdown may occur. \
\
The most crucial aspect of crisis intervention is rapid treatment, with the goal of resolving \
the crisis and avoiding the development of chronic symptoms. Specific elements of \
treatment include: rapidly establishing rapport with the client, reviewing the steps that have \
led to the crisis, helping the client to gain an understanding of his or her maladaptive \
reactions, and helping the client to develop more adaptive ways of dealing with the crisis. \
The client is also taught strategies to avoid hazardous situations that are likely to produce \
future crises. Crisis intervention is terminated as soon as it appears that the crisis has been \
resolved and that the client understands the steps that led to its development and resolution. \
\
Crisis intervention must be distinguished from short-term therapy. The focus in crisis \
intervention is on the crisis itself, and on restoring the client to the pre-crisis level of \
functioning. By contrast, short-term therapy focuses on helping the client to attain a higher \
level of functioning by addressing conflicts, interpersonal problems, and other long- \
standing issues. \
\
\
\
                             Section 5-Treatment/Intervention: Community Interventions \
\
      5.10 COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS \
\
Community psychology focuses on the prevention, treatment and rehabilitation of mental \
disorders through the use of organized community programs. The community psychology \
movement has it roots in the 1963 Community Mental Health Centers Act, in which \
community mental health centers (CMHCs) were created to provide five services: \
inpatient, emergency, consultation, day care (including halfway houses and outpatient \
treatment), and research and education. \
\
In an effort to reach more people and intervene earlier, community psychology extends \
mental health's sphere of operations beyond hospitals and clinics to more natural settings, \
such as churches, schools, and inner-city storefronts. Community psychology also \
emphasizes mental health consultation and training of nonprofessionals, which can expand \
services exponentially. \
\
I. CONSULTATION \
\
Consultation is considered an indirect service in which a consultant shares knowledge and \
skills with providers, programs, agencies or organizations, rather than providing direct \
clinical care to individuals or groups. Caplan delineated four categories of consultation: \
client-centered case consultation, consultee-centered case consultation, consultee-centered \
administrative consultation, and program-centered administrative consultation. \
\
>CLIENT-CENTERED CASE CONSULTATION   In this type of consultation, the \
consultant helps the consultee with an individual client. The consultant may make an expert \
assessment of the client's problems and then suggest specific ways to handle the case. For \
example, a consultant helps a therapist develop a treatment plan for a child who is \
diagnosed with conduct disorder. \
\
>CONSULTEE-CENTERED CASE CONSULTATION    In consultee-centered case \
consultation, the consultant helps the consultee with difficulties he or she is having in \
working with clients, whether the problems stem from inexperience, lack of skill, or \
difficulties with objectivity. For example, a therapist who commonly experiences \
countertransference toward clients diagnosed with borderline personality disorder meets \
with a consultant to work on ways to address her reactions. \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Community Interventions \
\
>CONSULTEE-CENTERED ADMINISTRATIVE CONSULTATION In this type of \
 consultation, the consultant focuses on the consultee's difficulties that limit effectiveness \
in instituting program change. For example, a consultant meets with a therapist who works \
in psychosocial rehabilitation in order to increase the therapist's knowledge about this type \
of program with the goal that the program be implemented more effectively. \
\
>PROGRAM-CENTERED ADMINISTRATIVE CONSULTATION In program- \
centered administrative consultation, the consultant focuses on developing, expanding, or \
modifying a program. For example, a consultant meets with a group of clinicians to help \
them develop or improve a program for teens at risk of joining gangs. \
\
                   WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE? \
    CASE CONSULTATION VERSUS ADMINISTRATIVE CONSULTATION \
\
  Case consultation refers to clinically-oriented consultation (e.g., about clients or \
  students). In contrast, administrative consultation refers to consultation aimed at \
  administrative issues or programmatic change. \
\
                   WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE? \
          CLIENT-CENTERED VERSUS CONSULTEE-CENTERED \
                     CASE CONSULTATION \
\
  Client-centered case consultation always involves consultation on one case or one \
  client. Consultee-centered case consultation involves helping the consultee with a \
  group of clients. \
\
 Advocacy consultation is different from the above types of consultation. In advocacy \
consultation, the consultant advocates for social change. \
\
 II. PREVENTION \
\
Prevention is a significant part of community psychology. The three levels of prevention \
are primary, secondary, and tertiary. \
\
>PRIMARY PREVENTION    Primary prevention attempts to prevent the onset or \
occurrence of a disease or disorder, and thereby reduce its incidence (or the number of new \
cases). Frequently, primary prevention focuses on building psychological health through \
\
\
\
                             Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Community Interventions \
\
education and competence training. Examples of primary prevention include alcohol and \
drug education, Head Start, and vaccinations. \
\
>SECONDARY PREVENTION Secondary prevention focuses on early identification \
and prompt treatment of an illness or disorder that already exists. The goal of secondary \
prevention is to stop relatively mild disorders from becoming more serious and prolonged. \
Thus, secondary prevention reduces the prevalence of a disorder (the number of cases of \
the disorder present at any given time) by shortening a disorder's duration. Examples \
include mammograms, hotlines, aggressively treating children with conduct disorder to \
prevent the development of antisocial personality disorder, screening children for learning \
disabilities and providing special programs early on. prompt treatment of earthquake \
victims evidencing trauma, etc. \
\
>TERTIARY PREVENTION   Tertiary prevention focuses on reducing the residual \
effects of a chronic disability or minimizing further negative consequences of an \
established, serious disorder. Examples of tertiary prevention include vocational \
rehabilitation and day treatment centers for clients with schizophrenia, and 12-step \
programs for alcoholics or addicts. \
\
                   WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE \
     PRIMARY VERSUS SECONDARY VERSUS TERTIARY PREVENTION \
\
Primary prevention prevents the problem or disorder from occurring altogether. In contrast, \
secondary prevention involves early identification of and aggressive treatment for a \
disorder or problem that already exists. Tertiary prevention is targeted at minimizing the \
long-term consequences of a chronic condition. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: General Therapy Issues \
\
         5.11 GENERAL THERAPY ISSUES \
\
I. CHILD ABUSE \
\
The National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect estimates that one million children are \
maltreated each year, and that there are between 2,000 and 4,000 deaths each year caused \
by abuse and neglect. \
\
>PHYSICAL ABUSE Of children who are physically abused, roughly 32% are under age \
five, 27% are between five and nine, 27% are between 10 and 14, and 14% are between 15 \
and 18. More than half of all abused or neglected children are children who were born \
prematurely or had low birth weight. \
\
Abused children are typically perceived by their parents as developmentally slow, \
different, and hard to discipline. Hyperactive children are especially vulnerable to physical \
abuse. Most abused children come from poor, socially isolated homes, where the \
perpetrators have inappropriate expectations of their children. \
\
Most commonly, the perpetrator of physical abuse is female. About 80% of all perpetrators \
live in the homes of the abused child. Of children who are physically abused, about 80% \
live in homes with two parents, and 20% in single parent households. Ninety percent of \
perpetrators of physical abuse were severely abused as kids. Most abusers do not have a \
history of major psychiatric problems, although substance abuse is quite common. \
\
>SEXUAL ABUSE There are 150,000 - 200,000 new cases of child sexual abuse reported \
each year, which is probably a significant underestimate. A family member perpetrates \
approximately 50% of all cases of sexual abuse. The most common abusers are fathers, step- \
fathers, uncles, and older siblings. Father-daughter incest often involves a passive, weak or \
otherwise incapacitated mother, a daughter who takes on the maternal role, a father who \
abuses alcohol, and overcrowding. About 25% of the cases of sexual abuse involve children \
under the age of eight. Sexual abuse peaks between the ages of nine and twelve. \
\
\
\
                              Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: General Therapy Issues \
\
II. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE \
\
>THE NATIONAL VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN SURVEY According to the \
National Violence Against Women Survey, published in July 2000 by the National Institute \
of Justice and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 25% of women surveyed and \
7.5% of men surveyed reported being raped or physically assaulted by an intimate partner at \
some point in their life. Based on these findings, it is estimated that every year some 1.5 \
million women and over 800,000 men are victims of domestic violence (also termed intimate \
partner violence). Violence against women is not only more common, it also tends to be more \
chronic and result in more serious injuries. The survey found higher rates of stalking than \
previously reported: 8% of women and 2% of men reported being stalked, leading to estimates \
of over 1 million stalkings a year. All forms of intimate partner violence appear underreported, \
however, especially by men. \
\
Although race and ethnicity have some bearing on the incidence of violence, their impact \
is lessened when other variables are controlled for. Reports of intimate partner violence do \
differ among types of relationships: 22% of women in heterosexual relationships, 11% of \
women in lesbian relationships, 23% of men in gay relationships, and 7% of men in \
heterosexual relationships reported being raped, physically assaulted or stalked. \
\
Violence often occurs along with emotionally abusive and controlling behaviors. In fact, \
the variable that best predicted the likelihood of violence was the presence of a verbally \
abusive partner. \
\
>OTHER FINDINGS ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE Many reports indicate that spousal \
abuse occurs most frequently in concert with alcohol or crack abuse. Other reports suggest \
that occurrence of spousal abuse is not correlated with substance use per se, but that the \
severity of the abuse is. \
\
Abusive men are likely to have come from violent homes and have witnessed spousal \
abuse. Some reports suggest that they may have a higher rate of having been abused \
themselves. Abusers tend to be immature, dependent, nonassertive, and to generally feel \
inferior. The abusive act becomes self-reinforcing, with cycles of abuse continuing and \
escalating over time. \
\
The research suggests that change in the perpetrator of the abuse takes place only when the \
victim refuses to tolerate the situation any further. The best long-term results seem to \
follow arrest of the perpetrator. \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 5-Treatment/Intervention: General Therapy Issues \
\
Some theorists differentiate between expressive and instrumental spousal abuse. \
Expressive abuse is less deliberate and results from difficulty managing emotions. \
Instrumental abuse is a more deliberate attempt to use violence as a means of control. \
Expressive abuse is more amenable to psychological treatment than instrumental abuse, \
but left untreated, expressive abuse typically becomes instrumental over time. \
\
III. RAPE \
\
Rape is an act of violence and humiliation. It is a way used by some to express power or \
anger. Sexual feelings are not typically central to the act. In fact, many men who rape \
experience sexual dysfunction during the act of rape itself. \
\
Rape often occurs in concert with another crime. Additionally, alcohol is involved at least \
50% of the time. Rape most commonly occurs within race. \
\
Rape is highly underreported, with possibly only one in ten cases reported. Most rapes are \
premeditated, with about one-third by strangers and two-thirds by perpetrators known to \
the victim. The victim being raped is frequently in a life-threatening situation and sequelae \
include shame, humiliation, confusion, fear, and rage, feelings which typically last a year \
or longer. \
\
IV. DIVORCE \
\
It is estimated that 40-50% of all marriages in the United States end in divorce. At the time \
of divorce, children of divorce tend to have more social, academic, and behavioral \
problems than children from intact homes. Some children of divorce become aggressive, \
withdrawn, or lose interest in schoolwork and socializing. \
\
The age of the child at the time of divorce can affect his or her reactions. Younger children \
are more anxious at the time of the divorce and have less realistic expectations of what \
caused it, but they adapt more quickly and have fewer bad memories than children who are \
older at the time of divorce. Typically, three to six-year-olds feel responsible and seven to \
twelve-year-olds show decreases in school performance. Adolescents feel they could have \
prevented the divorce but, at the same time, they also feel hurt by and are critical of their \
parents. In general, recovery from divorce takes children from three to five years. While \
most children of divorce adjust reasonably well, up to one-third experience lasting trauma. \
\
\
\
                             Section 5- Treatment/Intervention: General Therapy Issues \
\
Overall, children whose parents divorce seem to adjust better than children who to live \
with parents in a state of ongoing marital conflict. Children of divorce do better when the \
custodial parent provides a stable, structured, nurturing environment, and does not have \
unrealistic, age-inappropriate expectations of the children. To facilitate recovery, parents \
should control their anger, cooperate in parenting, and avoid arguing in front of the \
children. \
\
Initially, girls seem to adjust better than boys do; however, girls become increasingly \
vulnerable in adolescence and if the mother remarries. The most difficult relationship in \
blended families is between stepmothers and stepdaughters. \
\
Meta-analytic research reviewing 37 studies and involving 81,000 people (Amato & Keith, \
1991) found that, compared to adults who grew up in intact families, adult children of \
divorced parents tend to have higher levels of depression and marital problems and lower \
levels of SES and health. \
\
\
 \
\
                         Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Psychotherapy Outcome Research \
\
       5.12 PSYCHOTHERAPY OUTCOME \
                      RESEARCH \
\
The most extensive and comprehensive research that looks at psychotherapy outcome are \
meta-analytic studies. A meta-analysis applies the methods and principles of empirical \
research to the process of reviewing the literature. The findings of individual studies are \
quantified in a common way, by using an effect size. An effect size is a measure of standard \
deviation units of difference between treated and untreated subjects. \
\
The earliest comprehensive research of therapy outcome was that of Eysenck (1952), in \
which he reported that two thirds of all neurotics improved over a two-year period whether \
or not they received treatment. He also noted that treated people actually seemed to do \
worse than non-treated people. Eysenck's study has been widely criticized for non-random \
assignment to the treatment versus no treatment condition, providing attention to the so- \
called non-treated people (which could account for their improvement), and the lack of \
distinction between therapists administering treatment. \
\
Since Eysenck's time it has been suggested that the spontaneous improvement rate is closer \
to 40% (Bergin & Lambert, 1978). Furthermore, subsequent meta-analytic studies (e.g., \
Smith, Glass, and Miller, 1980), have found an average effect size of .85 in comparing \
treated and untreated individuals. This indicates that at the end of treatment, the average \
treated person is better off than 80% of the untreated sample. \
\
In a meta-analytic study (Howard, et. al., 1986), 50% of clients were measurably improved \
by the eighth session, and 75% of clients were measurably improved by the end of six \
months. Another finding of meta-analysis is that treatment gains are generally maintained, \
and they are maintained regardless of the length of follow-up. In comparing different types \
of treatment, Luborsky et. al. (1975) suggested that treatment outcomes are essentially \
similar for all types of treatment. \
\
>TREATMENT MANUALS AND EVIDENCE-BASED TREATMENT (EBT) Due to \
both scientific and economic considerations, research into evidence-based treatments has \
become increasingly popular. Division 12 of the American Psychological Association has \
published a list of treatments that have been empirically validated for specific disorders. These \
treatments are further ranked by how strong the research support is, e.g., "well-established," \
"probably efficacious." \
\
\
\
                         Section 3 - Treatment/Intervention: Psychotherapy Outcome Research \
\
The majority of well-established treatments are of short-term duration, use a behavioral or \
cognitive-behavioral approach and make use of treatment manuals. Treatment manuals \
provide standardized protocols to treat specific disorders. They facilitate research because \
they minimize differences in treatment that might occur when different therapists provide \
treatment or when therapists tailor treatment to the needs of a specific client. By decreasing \
the threat of variability in procedures, adherence to a treatment protocol increases the \
likelihood that statistical significance will be found. Treatment manuals also facilitate the \
dissemination of proven treatments to the general community of mental health \
practitioners. They simplify training requirements and even make it possible for less highly \
trained practitioners to provide appropriate treatment. \
\
Despite its advantages, the treatment manual approach also receives much criticism. First, \
many treatments approaches do not lend themselves to short-term standardized formats. \
Treatments that are probably efficacious are therefore not studied and validated. Second, \
treatment manuals prevent practitioners from tailoring treatment to the specific needs and \
 strengths of individual clients. \
\
The evidence-based (empirically validated) treatment approach comes under broader \
criticisms as well. EBT depends on efficacy research, in which tight experimental control \
maximizes internal validity. In addition to relying on short-term manualized treatment, \
efficacy studies typically recruit volunteers with easily diagnosed and uncomplicated \
disorders. Volunteers with co-morbid disorders or ambiguous diagnoses are not accepted. \
Finally, a treatment may be considered effective even when it fails to help over 30% of \
those who complete treatment. Efficacy studies are therefore criticized for not reflecting \
the real world of psychotherapy and psychotherapy clients. In other words, they are \
comparatively low in external validity or generalizability. In contrast, effectiveness \
research studies psychotherapy as it is actually practiced by practitioners in the real world. \
Compared to the numerous well-done efficacy studies, there are only a few effectiveness \
studies, which take longer and are more cumbersome. \
\
One of the best effectiveness studies was the 1995 Consumer Reports study, which \
analyzed the responses of 7,000 people to questionnaires about mental health treatment. \
This report concluded that clients benefited very substantially from psychotherapy, with \
90% of treated clients doing well. Long-term treatments yielded better outcomes than \
short-term treatments. Clients receiving medication as well as therapy did not benefit more \
than clients receiving therapy alone. Furthermore, no specific modality led to better \
outcomes for any disorder. Psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers did not differ \
in effectiveness. However, they all did better than marriage counselors and long-term \
\
 \
 \
\
                        Section 5- Treatment/Intervention: Psychotherapy Outcome Research \
\
family doctoring. Clients whose length of therapy or choice of therapist was limited by \
insurance or managed care did worse. \
\
There were many limitations to the Consumer Reports study, including the absence of a \
control group, non-random assignment, possible biased sampling, and reliance on \
retrospective self-report. Interestingly, many of the study's findings contradict those of \
efficacy studies. For example, in most efficacy studies, approximately 65% of clients \
improve, and short-term treatment appears to be highly effective. Some conclude that this \
discrepancy means that therapy outcomes may differ in the laboratory versus "in the field." \
Others attribute it to differences in research methodology. \
\
>CLIENT VARIABLES Client variables make up the largest contribution to therapeutic \
outcome, much larger than specific treatment methods or the therapy relationship. Key \
variables include the client's ability to relate and the client's amenability to new learning. Sue \
et al. (1976) examined issues of client variables in terms of dropout and outcome. They found \
that 23% of clients starting therapy dropped out after the first session and 70% dropped out \
before the tenth session. Overall, individuals of lower social classes and with less education \
drop out earlier and more frequently than those of higher SES and with more education. \
Persons of lower SES and education also tend to be assigned to less experienced therapists. \
African Americans tend to terminate earlier than Whites, but these findings are inconclusive \
and may relate to social class variables. Overall, social class affects duration of treatment but \
it appears to have no effect on outcome. \
\
Sex and age have been found to be unrelated to length of treatment or outcome. Overall, \
clients with symptoms of anxiety and depression improve the most, and those with somatic \
complaints improve the least. Likeability and attractiveness of clients is correlated with a \
positive outcome. \
\
>THERAPIST VARIABLES Non-technical aspects of therapists appear to be the most \
influential in affecting outcome. In terms of gender, it appears that treatment is facilitated with \
a female therapist or when client and therapist are of the same gender. Overall, there is \
relatively little difference in outcome whether client and therapist are matched for ethnicity. \
Nevertheless, clients seem to prefer therapists of their own ethnicity and may participate more \
in the early stages of treatment; thus there may be fewer premature terminations. Therapist \
attractiveness, trustworthiness, and expertness account for 35% of the outcome variance. \
Therapist competence does seem to have some impact on outcome, with more experienced \
therapists having a lower treatment dropout rate. \
\
\
\
                        Section 5- Treatment/Intervention: Psychotherapy Outcome Research \
\
>THE THERAPY RELATIONSHIP   Substantial research has demonstrated that the \
quality of the therapy relationship is as important, and sometimes more important to \
psychotherapy outcome than the method of treatment used. The Psychotherapy Division of \
APA (Division 29) has issued an updated report (2011) which concludes that several aspects \
of the therapy relationship can now be considered as "demonstrably effective." These include \
the therapeutic alliance in individual, youth, and family psychotherapy; cohesion in group \
therapy; empathy; and collecting client feedback. Aspects deemed to be "probably effective" \
included goal consensus, collaboration, and positive regard. Aspects deemed "promising but \
insufficient research to judge" included congruence/genuineness, repairing alliance ruptures, \
and managing countertransference. \
\
>SOME GENERAL RESEARCH FINDINGS   People seem to do as well in therapy \
whether they are seen for individual therapy or in group therapy. People over the age of 65 \
have the lowest rates of psychiatric disorders, with the most common disorder being dementia. \
People between the ages of 45 and 64 have the next lowest rate of psychiatric problems. \
Individuals between the ages of 25 and 44 have the highest rates of psychiatric disturbance. \
\
Women are more likely than men are to seek treatment for psychiatric problems. Married \
men and women present less frequently for treatment and seem to have less \
psychopathology as compared with divorced or single individuals. Rates of psychiatric \
disorders are lower for college than non-college graduates, and for suburban and rural \
rather than inner-city inhabitants. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Monitoring Treatment \
\
        5.13 MONITORING TREATMENT \
\
Over the past decade, there has been a movement toward monitoring treatment \
implementation, utilization, and quality. Methods by which treatment is monitored include \
quality assurance and utilization review. \
\
>TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT (TQM) Total quality management (TQM) is a \
philosophy and set of guiding principles that focus on continuous improvement of the \
organization, its procedures, and the services that it provides for its customers. TQM \
focuses on the needs of the customer, and on improving the quality of the work and finished \
product. TQM promotes continuous monitoring and improvement of company procedures \
in order to reduce procedures that are inefficient or wasteful. TQM involves the entire \
organization in the improvement of quality, and also empowers employees at all levels. \
\
TQM is based on five premises. \
\
     CUSTOMER FOCUS The goal is meeting the needs of customers. \
\
     TOTAL INVOLVEMENT Total involvement means that all the members of the \
     team are aware of what each member is doing, as well as the overall goal of the \
     team. \
\
     MEASUREMENT Measurement requires the use of quantitative methods to \
     measure progress. \
\
     SYSTEMATIC SUPPORT    Systematic support involves using innovative \
     problem solving. \
\
     CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT Continuous improvement is based on the \
     belief that there are always better ways to get the job done. \
\
TQM uses a problem prevention cycle proposed by Deming, which includes four steps: \
plan, do, check and act. \
\
\
\
                              Section 5 - Treatment/Intervention: Monitoring Treatment \
\
>QUALITY ASSURANCE (QA) Quality assurance involves monitoring and evaluating \
a plan's health care services in terms of availability or accessibility, adequacy, and \
appropriateness. QA also assesses a program's strategies to promote continuous \
improvement. \
\
QA interventions include monitoring patterns and outcomes of care, conducting customer \
satisfaction surveys, reviewing targeted diagnoses and treatments, and comparing current \
with past performance. \
\
>UTILIZATION REVIEW (UR) Utilization review focuses primarily on conserving \
costs and resources. UR strategies include reviews (prospective, concurrent, and \
retrospective), second opinions and case management. The goal is to evaluate the medical \
necessity, appropriateness, cost-effectiveness, and quality of proposed and delivered \
services. \
\
>RISK MANAGEMENT Risk management involves taking steps to reduce inappropriate \
practices and thereby limit the potential for liability or malpractice. It includes planned \
programs for loss prevention and liability management. Risk management programs are \
directed toward identifying and evaluating potential risks and taking actions against factors \
that could harm patients and staff. \
\
\
 \
\
RESEARCH             DESIGN,          STATISTICS, \
\
    AND        TEST     CONSTRUCTION \
\
                        SECTION 6 \
\
                      PsychPrep \
                      PASS EFFICIENTLY \
\
        SECTION 6: RESEARCH DESIGN, \
  STATISTICS, AND TEST CONSTRUCTION \
\
                RESEARCH DESIGN \
\
                     6.1 OVERVIEW \
\
  Research design refers to the specific setup of a research study. Key issues include the \
  selection of variables (independent and dependent), the types of research (experimental, \
  quasi-experimental, and non-experimental), design strategies (group and single subject), \
  time frames, and sampling procedures. \
\
  I. INDEPENDENT VARIABLES (IVS) AND DEPENDENT \
  VARIABLES (DVS) \
\
  >INDEPENDENT VARIABLES (IVS) Independent variables form the basis of the \
  groups that are being compared. For example, when three treatments for depression are \
  being contrasted, type of treatment is one iv. If males and females are being compared, \
  gender is one iv. \
\
  There are two main types of IVs-IVs that are directly manipulated by the researcher, and \
  IVs that are pre-existing and therefore cannot be manipulated by the researcher. \
\
       MANIPULATED IVs Independent variables that are manipulated are commonly \
       termed environmental or situational variables. For example, in contrasting three \
       treatments for depression (cognitive-behavioral, psychodynamic, and medications), \
       the IV is type of treatment and it is a manipulated IV. \
\
       NON-MANIPULATED IVs Subject or individual difference variables refer to \
       independent variables that cannot be manipulated by the researcher because they \
       are pre-existing. For example, in contrasting men and women, the IV of gender \
       cannot be manipulated. \
\
  \
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Research Design: Overview \
\
>DEPENDENT VARIABLES Dependent variables are the outcome measures selected. \
For example, level of depression can be measured with scores on the beck depression \
inventory. Dependent variables can be nominal, ordinal, interval, or ratio. \
\
II. TYPES OF RESEARCH \
\
>TRUE EXPERIMENTAL The hallmark of true experimental research is that at least \
one iv is manipulated and subjects are randomly assigned. For example, a study is \
conducted to compare the effects of two types of treatment for anxiety. In this situation, \
the iv of treatment is manipulated, and the subjects are randomly assigned to one of the \
two treatment groups. \
\
>QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL In quasi-experimental research, at least one iv is \
manipulated, but there is non-random assignment of subjects, typically because subjects \
are already in pre-existing groups. For example, an experiment investigating the effects of \
two different treatments might administer one treatment to the patients of a hospital ward \
(ward a) and a second treatment to the patients of a different hospital ward (ward b). \
Because the wards were pre-existing and the patients weren't randomly assigned to the \
treatment groups, this design would be considered quasi-experimental. \
\
>OBSERVATIONAL, PASSIVE OR NON-EXPERIMENTAL In observational. \
passive, or non-experimental research, there is no intervention or manipulation. These \
studies are sometimes called correlational, but this is a misnomer because they do not use \
statistics of correlation (e.g., pearson r) but rather statistics that detect group differences \
(e.g., anova). An example of such a design would be a study comparing the extent of \
cigarette smoking in adolescent males and females. In this study the iv is gender, which \
cannot be manipulated. The dv is extent of cigarette smoking. \
\
III. DESIGN STRATEGIES AND MEASUREMENT \
\
A. GROUP DESIGNS \
\
When conducting research with groups of subjects, the design can be either a between \
groups design, a within subjects design, or a mixed design. \
\
>BETWEEN GROUPS DESIGN   The between groups design only compares groups \
that are independent. An example would be a study looking at the differences in reading \
levels of two different classes of second grade students. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Research Design: Overview \
\
>WITHIN SUBJECTS DESIGN In a within subjects design, the groups contrasted are \
correlated or related. There are three conditions that lead to correlated data: 1) subjects are \
repeatedly measured ("repeated measures"); 2) subjects have been matched prior to their \
assignment to the groups; or 3) subjects have an inherent relationship (e.g .. pairs of \
identical twins). \
\
A specific subtype of the repeated measures design involves subjects that are exposed to \
several different interventions or conditions, in sequence. For example, a researcher is \
looking at differences in ability to remember nouns, verbs, and nonsense syllables. All \
subjects are given all three types of word lists to remember. Because of possible carryover \
effects, this research requires counterbalancing, whereby subjects are divided into thirds. \
One group receives nonsense syllables first, the second receives nouns first, and the third \
receives verbs first. The Latin Square is the most sophisticated form of counterbalancing. \
\
>MIXED DESIGN A mixed design involves groups that are both independent and \
correlated. For example, patients are assigned to two different treatment groups for \
depression which are later compared (independent groups). Each group is also measured \
before and after treatment (correlated groups or repeated measures). \
\
B. SINGLE SUBJECT DESIGNS \
\
The hallmark of the single subject design is that one or very few subjects are studied \
intensively, and each subject is measured many times, typically during baseline as well as \
during treatment. Single subject approaches are referred to as idiographie; in contrast, \
group approaches are termed nomothetic. Single subject designs include the AB, ABAB, \
multiple baseline, simultaneous treatment, and the changing criterion. \
\
A significant problem associated with any single subject design is autocorrelation, or the \
effect of measuring the same person repeatedly, which results in highly correlated data. \
\
>AB DESIGN In an AB design, a baseline condition (A) is followed by a treatment \
condition (B). For example, a subject is trying to lose weight. Her weight is recorded \
repeatedly during the baseline phase, and then her weight continues to be recorded during \
the prescribed dietary intervention phase (i.e., treatment condition). The most significant \
problem associated with the AB design is the threat of history. Specifically, when \
improvement is noted, it is hard to determine whether it was the intervention that caused \
the change or some other event (e.g., treatment began during the summer and the subject \
always eats less when the weather is hot). \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Research Design: Overview \
\
>ABAB DESIGN In the ABAB design, baseline and treatment conditions are alternated \
in the following sequence: baseline (A), treatment (B), baseline (A), treatment (B). For \
example, an autistic child engages in head banging. The number of episodes of head \
banging is recorded daily, for at least one week, during the baseline phase. While treatment \
is implemented over the course of several weeks, the number of episodes of head banging \
continues to be recorded daily. Then, treatment is temporarily discontinued (return to \
baseline) and the incidence of head banging continues to be monitored daily. Finally, \
treatment is resumed and head-banging episodes are still recorded daily. \
\
The ABAB design protects against the threat of history. If the expected pattern of change \
is found (e.g., less head banging during treatment, more head banging during baseline), it \
is highly unlikely to be caused by a factor external to treatment. The two problems \
associated with the ABAB design are failure of the dependent variable (which is being \
measured daily) to return to baseline, and issues of ethics with regard to removing treatment \
that is effective. \
\
>MULTIPLE BASELINE DESIGN The multiple baseline design involves research in \
which treatment is applied sequentially or consecutively across subjects, situations, or \
behaviors. The multiple baseline design resolves the problems associated with AB and \
ABAB designs, but it tends to be more time consuming and expensive. \
\
     MULTIPLE BASELINE ACROSS SUBJECTS An example of a multiple \
     baseline across subjects design would involve research looking at the effect of \
     medication on hyperactivity for three different children with ADHD. All three \
     children are measured repeatedly during the initial baseline phase (e.g., daily for \
     one week). The first child is then given medication and monitored daily, while the \
     second and third children continue to be measured daily without any treatment \
     (baseline continues). The second child is then given medication and monitored \
     daily, while the third child continues to be monitored without any treatment \
     (baseline continues). After the second child's treatment is well under way, the third \
     child is put on medication. \
\
     MULTIPLE BASELINE ACROSS SITUATIONS An example of multiple \
     baseline across situations would involve applying an intervention to one problem \
     behavior of one subject in three different settings or situations (e.g., a behavioral \
     intervention for tantrums at home, at school, and in the park). Treatment would \
     again be applied consecutively. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Research Design: Overview \
\
     MULTIPLE BASELINE ACROSS BEHAVIORS An example of multiple \
     baseline across behaviors would involve an intervention for three problem \
     behaviors of one subject. The intervention would be applied first to one problem \
     behavior (e.g., head banging), next to the second behavior (e.g., rocking), and \
     finally to the third behavior (self-biting). \
\
>SIMULTANEOUS (ALTERNATING) TREATMENT DESIGN The simultaneous \
or alternating treatment design involves two or more interventions implemented \
concurrently during the treatment phase. Treatments are balanced and varied across time \
of day. This allows for comparison of the relative effectiveness of two or more \
interventions for an individual. For example, the effectiveness of two behavioral \
interventions to decrease head banging (e.g., M & M's versus praise) could be contrasted \
by alternating them during the day and balancing them across different days. \
\
>CHANGING CRITERION DESIGN In the changing criterion design, an attempt is \
made to change behavior in increments to match a changing criterion. For example, a \
person who drinks ten cups of coffee per day would like to dramatically cut back. To help \
this person reduce or eliminate coffee consumption, the researcher would first set the \
criterion at eight cups of coffee per day. Once the person is only drinking eight cups per \
day, the criterion would be changed to six cups per day, and so forth, until the person no \
longer drinks coffee. \
\
C. BEHAVIORAL MEASUREMENT \
\
>TIME SAMPLING Time sampling is a type of behavioral measurement that is useful \
when a behavior is not discrete, and thus has no distinct beginning and end. The two types of \
time sampling are momentary time sampling and whole-interval sampling. Time sampling \
would be appropriate, for example, when measuring to what extent a person attended to a \
speaker during a lecture. Time sampling involves breaking the period of interest into smaller \
periods of time (e.g., the two-hour lecture is broken into one-minute intervals). \
\
     MOMENTARY TIME SAMPLING Momentary time sampling involves the \
     observer simply recording whether the target behavior is present or absent at the \
     moment that the time interval ends. \
\
     WHOLE-INTERVAL SAMPLING Whole-interval sampling (also called interval \
     sampling or interval recording) involves scoring target behavior positively only if it \
     is exhibited for the full duration of the time interval. \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Research Design: Overview \
\
>EVENT RECORDING Event recording or sampling involves tallying the number of \
times the target behavior occurred. It is useful when the target behavior is discrete and occurs \
relatively infrequently (e.g., counting the number of times that a student arrived to school \
late). \
\
IV. CONDITIONS OF EXPERIMENTATION \
\
>ANALOGUE RESEARCH Analogue research evaluates treatment under conditions \
that only resemble or approximate clinical situations. Typically, the problems studied are \
less severe. For example, the participants are college students and volunteers, the therapists \
are graduate students, and treatments tend to be highly standardized. Analogue research \
allows for tight experimental control but limited generalizability. \
\
>CLINICAL TRIALS Clinical trials refer to outcome investigations conducted in clinical \
settings. Due to being conducted in clinical settings, some methodological compromises \
and sacrifices often have to be made. \
\
V. TIME FRAME \
\
>CROSS-SECTIONAL RESEARCH Cross-sectional research looks at differences \
across sections (e.g., different ages) by sampling subjects from the age categories of \
interest, at one point in time. For example, a study looks at how much time persons spend \
on the internet in groups of persons of different ages (e.g., 20-year-olds, 40-year-olds, and \
60-year-olds). Cross-sectional research is subject to problems with cohort effects. In the \
example given, it may be the case that persons who are younger use the internet more than \
those who are older, simply because they have grown up with computers. This would be \
an example of a cohort effect. \
\
>LONGITUDINAL RESEARCH Longitudinal research involves following a group of \
subjects over many years in order to understand the changes that take place as people age. \
An example would be tracking a group of people from infancy through old age and looking \
at changes in savings habits. Problems with longitudinal research include significant \
expense and high dropout rates. \
\
>CROSS-SEQUENTIAL RESEARCH Cross-sequential or cohort-sequential research \
attempts to correct for problems associated with both cross-sectional and longitudinal \
research. Cross-sequential research takes several cross sections (e.g. Of age groups) and \
follows them over much briefer periods of time. An example would be a study looking at \
health habits across the life span. Rather than studying several groups of persons of \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Research Design: Overview \
\
different ages at one point in time (cross-sectional research) or studying one group of \
individuals over their entire lifespan (longitudinal research), groups of persons at different \
ages would be tracked for a period of five to ten years. \
\
VI. SAMPLING PROCEDURES \
\
One of the most important issues in subject selection is that subjects be a representative \
sample of the population. The major selection strategies include simple random sampling. \
stratified random sampling, proportional sampling, systematic sampling, and cluster \
sampling. \
\
>SIMPLE RANDOM SAMPLING In simple random sampling, every member of the \
population has an equal chance of being randomly selected. For example, in a study of \
registered voters in California, voters would be randomly selected from the roster of all \
registered voters, thereby ensuring that every registered voter in California had an equal \
chance of being selected. \
\
>STRATIFIED RANDOM SAMPLING In stratified random sampling, the population \
is first divided into strata (e.g., age levels, income levels, ethnic groups), and then a random \
sample of equal size from each stratum is selected. An example would be first dividing the \
population into various different SES levels, and then selecting equal numbers of subjects \
from each SES level. \
\
>PROPORTIONAL SAMPLING In proportional sampling, individuals are randomly \
selected in proportion to their representation in the general population. For example, a \
given population is 85% White, 10% Hispanic, and 5% African American. The subject \
pool selected from this population would then be 85% White, 10% Hispanic, and 5% \
African American. \
\
>SYSTEMATIC SAMPLING Systematic sampling involves selecting every kth element \
after a random start, e.g., if 100 out of 1000 persons are needed, every tenth person is \
selected. Such sampling needs to be arranged in such a way that it is not biased. \
\
>CLUSTER SAMPLING Cluster sampling involves identifying naturally occurring \
groups of subjects (clusters) and randomly selecting certain clusters (e.g., classes at a \
university or schools within a particular school district). Once the clusters have been \
selected, all subjects within each cluster are surveyed. For example, a psychologist wants \
to study achievement in 8th graders in the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD). \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 6 - Research Design: Overview \
\
 She might randomly select ten schools from the district, and then assess the achievement \
 of all the 8th graders in the ten randomly selected schools. \
\
 \
\
                                        Section 6 - Research Design : Threats \
\
      6.2 THREATS IN RESEARCH DESIGN \
\
 The goal of research is to draw inferences about the relationships among variables. \
 Experimentation attempts to minimize ambiguity in reaching these inferences. Factors that \
 can interfere with drawing clear conclusions are considered to be threats. They include \
 threats to internal validity, threats to construct validity, threats to external validity, and \
 threats to statistical conclusion validity. \
\
 I. THREATS TO INTERNAL VALIDITY \
\
 Ideally, when differences between groups are found, researchers can conclude that the \
 intervention (IV) caused the change in outcome (DV). Threats to internal validity refer to \
 factors other than the IV that may have caused the change in the DV. \
\
 >HISTORY History refers to specific incidents that intervene between measuring points, \
 either in or outside of the experimental situation. For example, an intervention targeted at \
 increasing earthquake preparedness is implemented with a group of subjects (e.g., they \
 view a movie). The subjects' level of preparedness is measured and compared before and \
 after the intervention. If a sizable earthquake were to occur between measurement periods, \
 it would not be clear if an increase in preparedness were due to the intervention or to history \
 (i.e., the earthquake that occurred outside of the experimental situation). The best control \
 for history is a control group. \
\
 >MATURATION Maturation refers to factors that affect the subjects' performance \
 because of the passing of time (fatigue, maturing). For example, a group of young children \
 is put in a two-year program to help them develop greater coordination for sports. It would \
 be difficult to determine whether the program actually helped improve coordination or \
 whether the children's coordination improved simply because of biological maturation. \
 The best control for maturation is also a control group. \
\
>TESTING OR TEST PRACTICE Testing or test practice occurs when familiarity with \
 testing affects scores on repeated testing. For example, a group of children is measured on \
 a novel task. They are then given the intervention and retested. They show significant \
 improvement on the task upon retesting. It is not clear if the improvement is due to the \
 intervention or to the effects of test practice. The best control for testing is the Solomon \
 Four-Group design. \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs24 \cf0 \cb5 \
                                        Section 6 - Research Design: Threats \
\
 The Solomon Four-Group design involves dividing subjects into four groups. One group \
 is measured pre and post and gets the intervention in between. The second group is \
 measured pre and post, but does not get the intervention. The third group is measured post \
 only and gets the intervention. The fourth group is measured post only and does not get the \
 intervention. \
\
>INSTRUMENTATION Instrumentation refers to changes in observers or the calibration \
 of equipment. An example of a problem with instrumentation is that biofeedback electrodes \
(especially GSR) tend to show reductions in scores as the equipment wears out. In research \
 designed to look at the effects of a relaxation intervention, it would be difficult to ascertain \
 whether observed reductions in GSR might be due to the effects of treatment or to problems \
 with instrumentation. A control group would correct for this problem. \
\
>STATISTICAL REGRESSION Statistical regression, or regression to the mean, is the \
tendency for extreme scores (scores very much above or below the mean) to become less \
 extreme (closer to the mean) on retesting, even without any type of intervention. For \
example, subjects who scored extremely high on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) \
 would most likely score a bit lower upon a second administration of the BDI. So, if a \
 depression treatment were targeted at persons who scored extremely high on the BDI, it \
 would be difficult to determine if any reductions in score were actually due to treatment or \
simply to the effects of regression to the mean. A control group is the best way to manage \
 possible problems related to statistical regression. \
\
>SELECTION BIAS Selection bias is caused by non-random assignment. For example, \
 if the first twenty subjects who volunteer for a research study are assigned to one treatment, \
 and the second twenty subjects who volunteer are assigned to a different treatment, any \
 differences found between the groups may not only be due to the effects of treatment but \
 may also be due to differences in the type of subjects who volunteer early versus late. \
 Problems due to selection are best avoided by using random assignment. \
\
 >ATTRITION OR EXPERIMENTAL MORTALITY    Attrition or experimental \
 mortality is a concern when there is a differential loss of subjects from the groups. For \
 example, less depressed subjects may drop out of the control group while more depressed \
 subjects may drop out of the treatment group. As a consequence, the treatment group \
 appears less depressed at the end of treatment. However, the apparent lower level of \
 depression may not be due to the effects of treatment but rather to the pattern of attrition. \
 To assess for problems of attrition, subjects who drop out should be compared on relevant \
 variables by running t-tests. \
\
 \
\
                                        Section 6 - Research Design : Threats \
\
>DIFFUSION Diffusion occurs when the no-treatment group actually gets some of the \
 treatment, thus clouding treatment effects. For example, anxious subjects are assigned to \
 two groups. One group receives specific cognitive-behavioral interventions for anxiety \
 reduction, while the other group merely receives non-specific elements of therapy, such as \
 reflective statements. However, during the research, some cognitive strategies are \
 inadvertently discussed in the control group. At the end of the study, anxiety seems to be \
 lessened in both groups of subjects. While it is hard to completely eliminate the problem \
 of diffusion, tighter control over the experimental situation can help. \
\
 II. THREATS TO CONSTRUCT VALIDITY \
\
 If an experiment has good internal validity and it can be concluded that the intervention \
 (e.g., cognitive-behavioral therapy) did cause a change in the DV (e.g., level of depression), \
 it is still important to ascertain whether it was the intended factor (e.g., eliciting automatic \
 thoughts) that caused the effect, or whether it was something else (e.g., attention). \
 Construct validity (as described by Kazdin) refers to factors other than the desired specifics \
 of our intervention that result in differences. These factors are often lumped under threats \
 to external validity. \
\
>ATTENTION AND CONTACT WITH CLIENTS Attention and contact with clients \
 can be a threat, for example, in an experiment intended to assess the effectiveness of a \
 particular therapy technique. In this situation, it is hard to tell whether the change in the \
 patients is due to the actual technique used, or is merely due to contact with the therapist. \
\
 >EXPERIMENTER EXPECTANCIES Experimenter expectancies, also known as the \
 Rosenthal effect, refer to the cues or clues transmitted to the subjects by the experimenter. \
 For example, when interviewing subjects about their symptoms of depression, the \
 experimenter inadvertently smiles and nods encouragingly only at those subjects who \
 received the actual medication, which then results in these subjects reporting more \
 improvement. Having the experimenter blind to the subjects' treatment condition can \
 control for this threat. \
\
>DEMAND CHARACTERISTICS Demand characteristics are factors in the procedures \
 that suggest how the subject should behave. For example, subjects given medication are \
 told that the medication might cause certain side effects, and in fact subjects then report \
 more side effects. By contrast, subjects given the placebo are told there won't be any side \
 effects, and they then report no side effects. To reduce demand characteristics, subjects \
 should be blind to their treatment condition. \
\
 \
 \
\
                                        Section 6 - Research Design: Threats \
\
>JOHN HENRY EFFECT The John Henry effect, also called compensatory rivalry, \
occurs when persons in a control group try harder than usual in the spirit of competition \
with the experimental group. In this situation, members of the control group may actually \
outperform persons in the experimental or treatment group. John Henry was a legendary \
railroad steel driver, who swung his hammer in competition with a steam drill. He \
outperformed the steam drill, although he later died from overexertion. To control or \
eliminate the John Henry effect, the experimental and control groups should not know \
about each other. If this is not possible, the groups should not be given any sense of \
competition. \
\
III. THREATS TO EXTERNAL VALIDITY \
\
When significant findings are obtained, it is important to ascertain whether the results can \
be generalized from the sample studied to the population. Factors that interfere with \
generalizability are called threats to external validity. \
\
>SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS Sample characteristics refer to differences between \
the sample and the population. For examples, volunteers used to study the effect of a \
particular intervention for sleep problems may somehow differ from the population of \
persons with sleep problems who do not volunteer for research. Volunteers may be more \
enthusiastic, more compliant, more willing to engage in treatment, etc. It would therefore \
be difficult to generalize from the sample of volunteers to the population of interest. \
\
>STIMULUS CHARACTERISTICS Stimulus characteristics, such as artificial research \
arrangements, are features of the study with which the intervention is associated. For \
example, research assessing memory functioning in the laboratory may not be \
generalizable to memory functioning in naturalistic settings. In fact, the elderly generally \
demonstrate much better memory ability on real-world tasks than laboratory tasks. \
\
>CONTEXTUAL CHARACTERISTICS    Contextual characteristics refer to the \
conditions in which the intervention is imbedded. Reactivity is a significant threat to \
external validity. Reactivity occurs when subjects behave in a certain way just because \
they are participating in research and being observed. The Hawthorne effect is a \
frequently described example of reactivity. \
\
\
\
                                       Section 6 - Research Design: Threats \
\
IV. THREATS TO STATISTICAL CONCLUSION \
VALIDITY \
\
If statistically significant results are not obtained, it is important to look at whether the \
treatment was ineffective, or whether the lack of significant findings was due to statistical \
problems. \
\
Threats to statistical validity include low power, unreliability of measures, variability in \
procedures, and subject heterogeneity. \
\
>LOW POWER Low power is defined as a diminished ability to find significant results. \
Factors that can contribute to low power include small sample size and inadequate \
interventions (e.g., treatment for depression lasting only two sessions). \
\
>UNRELIABILITY OF MEASURES Even if the intervention is effective, significant \
differences may not be found if the outcome measure used is unreliable. \
\
>VARIABILITY IN PROCEDURES Variability in procedures refers to inconsistency \
in treatment procedures, which can obscure significant treatment findings. This threat is \
especially of concern in psychotherapy outcome research. \
\
>SUBJECT HETEROGENEITY Subject heterogeneity makes it more difficult to find \
significance differences between groups. In research looking for differences, the greater \
the subject heterogeneity (e.g., subjects vary in age from 15 to 60, or varying significantly \
in terms of diagnosis), the less the likelihood is of finding significance. \
\
V. INTERRELATIONS OF THREATS \
\
Using a control group and random assignment can minimize most threats to internal \
validity. The dilemma is that the more controlled or precise the experiment is, the less \
generalizable it is likely to be, or put differently, the greater the internal validity, the lower \
the external validity. \
\
\
 \
\
                                          Section 6 - Statistics: Basic Math \
\
                    STATISTICS \
\
                   6.3 BASIC MATH \
\
There are two basic mathematical principles and a third theoretical principle that once \
mastered should allow you to quickly and accurately respond to most questions requiring \
calculations on the EPPP. \
\
>SQUARING DECIMALS Squaring decimals is just like squaring whole numbers; \
the trick is knowing where to put the decimal point. When you square decimals, the \
result is always smaller than the original value. When you square a decimal that is \
expressed in tenths (e.g., .42), the response will always be expressed in hundredths \
(e.g. . 16). The tricky ones are .22, and .32, whose squares are .01, .04, and .09 \
respectively. \
\
>SQUARE-ROOTING DECIMALS The trick to square-rooting decimals is to first \
express your decimal in hundredths rather than tenths or thousandths (e.g., .50 rather \
than .5, and .10 rather than .100), and then to look for the number that is closest to \
the square root. The result should always be expressed in tenths. \
\
  Example A:       = . 8 \
  Example B:   1.5 =   - . 7 \
  Example C:   V.1 = 1.10 = 3 \
\
>RELATIONSHIPS IN EQUATIONS \
\
   a= b                           a= b (1 -c) \
     c \
\
  a varies directly with b   a varies directly with b \
   a varies indirectly with e a varies indirectly with c \
\
              Sx = SDpop \
     Example D:              Example E: Smeas = SDx V1 -Txx \
                 VN \
\
\
\
                                        Section 6 - Statistics: Types of Data \
\
                6.4 TYPES OF DATA \
\
The type of data is critical in determining the type of statistical test to be used (e.g., \
parametric versus nonparametric). It is most important to ascertain what type of data the \
dependent variable (DV) or outcome variable is. This can be accomplished by determining \
how any given person is measured. Specifically, it should be asked whether the person is \
given a score or numerical value (interval or ratio data), or whether the person is assigned \
to a category or tallied up as one point in a given category (nominal or ordinal data). \
\
The four types of data are nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio. A helpful acronym is NOIR. \
Nominal data, especially when there are only two categories (e.g., gender), are commonly \
called dichotomous, while interval or ratio data are frequently called continuous. \
\
>NOMINAL DATA Nominal data involve tallying people (head count) to see which non- \
ordered category each person falls into. Examples include taking a group of 100 subjects \
and tallying them based on sex (male or female), voting preference (Democrat or \
Republican), or ethnicity (White, Hispanic, Asian, African American). Nominal categories \
have no inherent order to them. Numbers or frequencies are obtained for each category. \
These frequencies can be converted to proportions or percentages (e.g., percent of males. \
proportion of Democrats). Group means cannot be calculated from nominal data. \
\
>ORDINAL DATA Ordinal data involve tallying people (head count) to see which \
ordered category each person falls into. Examples include taking a group of 500 subjects \
and tallying them according to their attitude toward abortion (a likert scales), SES, or \
percentile ranks (e.g., for income). The categories are ordered, and numbers or frequencies \
are obtained for each category. Group means cannot be calculated from ordinal data. \
\
>INTERVAL DATA Interval data involve obtaining numerical scores for each person, \
where the score values have equal intervals. There is either no zero score (e.g., IQ scores \
or t-scores) or zero is not absolute (e.g., temperature in \uc0\u8451  or \'baF). Group means can be \
calculated from interval data. \
\
>RATIO DATA Ratio data involve obtaining numerical scores for each person, where \
the score values have equal intervals and an absolute zero. Examples include savings in \
the bank, score on the EPPP, weight, and number of children. Means can be calculated \
\
\
 \
\
                                          Section 6 - Statistics: Types of Data \
\
 from ratio data. Comparisons can also be made across score values (e.g., $10 is twice as \
 much as $5). \
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Statistics: Descriptive Statistics \
\
          6.5 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS \
\
There are two broad classes of statistics: descriptive and inferential. With descriptive \
statistics, the data collected (the DV) are simply described. With inferential statistics, the \
goal is to make inferences about the population from the sample. \
\
Descriptive statistics can further be divided into two basic groups: statistics that describe \
the whole group's data, and statistics that describe an individual's score relative to the \
group. \
\
I. GROUP DATA \
\
A. MEASURES OF CENTRAL TENDENCY \
\
The entire group's data can be described using measures of central tendency, which include \
the mean, median, and mode. \
\
>MEAN The mean is the arithmetic average of a group of data. It is calculated by adding \
up all the scores in the group and dividing by the total number of scores. \
\
>MEDIAN The median corresponds to the score at the 50th percentile. It is that score at \
which half the people in the group score below and half the people in the group score above. \
\
>MODE The mode is the most frequently occurring score. It is the score that is obtained \
by more people in the group than any other score. \
\
The best measure of central tendency is typically the mean. However, when data are either \
skewed or there are some very extreme scores present, the median is most accurate. \
\
B. MEASURES OF VARIABILITY \
\
The group's data can also be described using the measures of variability, which include the \
standard deviation, the variance, and the range. \
\
>STANDARD DEVIATION The standard deviation is a measure of average deviation \
(or spread) from the mean in a given set of scores. Consider two sets of data each with \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Descriptive \
\
three scores. Set 1 = 8, 10, and 12; Set 2 = 2, 10, and 18. While the means for both groups \
are 10, the standard deviation, or spread of scores for Set 2 is much larger. \
\
>VARIANCE Mathematically, the standard deviation is the square root of the variance. \
Said another way, the variance is the standard deviation squared. \
\
>RANGE The range is the crudest measure of variability. It is simply the difference \
between the highest and lowest value obtained. \
\
The effect of mathematical operations on the mean and standard deviation is such that if \
points are added to or subtracted from everyone's score, the mean is affected, but not the \
standard deviation; if scores are either divided or multiplied, both the mean and standard \
deviation are affected. \
\
C. GRAPHS \
\
The group's data can also be depicted using graphs (e.g., bar graphs, curves, etc.). On a \
graph of group data, the X-axis either represents categories (for nominal or ordinal data) \
or scores (for interval or ratio data), while the Y-axis always represents frequency. Data \
that are nominal are graphed using a bar graph. Data that are ordinal are also graphed using \
a bar graph, with the exception of percentile ranks, which are depicted graphically as flat \
or rectangular. Interval or ratio data are graphed with curves. \
\
 Nominal/Ordinal Data Percentile Ranks   Interval/Ratio Data \
\
\
\
                                   Section 6 - Statistics: Descriptive \
\
Most interval or ratio variables are normally distributed. Data that are not normally \
distributed are considered skewed or kurtotic. In a skewed distribution, scores are not \
equally distributed above and below the mean. In a positive skew, there is a higher \
proportion of scores in the lower range of values; in a negative skew, there is a higher \
proportion of scores in the higher range of values. Note that in a positive skew, the mode \
has the lowest value of the three measures of central tendency, and the mean has the highest \
value. In a negative skew, the relationship is reversed: the mean has the lowest value and \
the mode has the highest value. Kurtosis refers to how peaked a distribution is. Instead of \
the familiar bell shape, a leptokurtotic distribution has a very sharp peak, and a \
platykurtotic distribution is flattened. \
\
              Positive skew     Negative skew \
\
II. INDIVIDUAL SCORES \
\
A. RAW SCORES \
\
Knowing an individual's score (X) on a test usually provides very little information. The \
percentage correct (%) can be determined but it remains unclear if it is a good, bad, or \
mediocre score. Percentage correct is considered a criterion-referenced or domain- \
referenced score. \
\
B. PERCENTILE RANKS \
\
In general, what is most relevant is how the person scored relative to the group. A score \
that provides such information is called a norm-referenced score. The most informative \
norm-referenced score is the percentile rank. A percentile rank indicates the percentage of \
cases in a sample that are equal to or below a particular score. For example, a person who \
scores at the 98th percentile has scored the same or higher than 98% of the rest of the \
sample. As mentioned above, the distribution of percentile ranks is graphically depicted as \
flat or rectangular. \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Statistics: Descriptive Statistics \
\
 C. STANDARD SCORES \
\
Standard scores are based on the standard deviation of the sample. Examples include z- \
scores, t-scores, IQ scores, SAT scores, and EPPP scores. Z-scores are the most basic \
standard scores in that they correspond directly to standard deviation (SD) units. Z-scores \
 have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. For example, a z-score of +2 \
represents a score that is 2 SDs above the mean. The shape of the z-score distribution is \
 always identical to the shape of the raw score distribution. Transforming raw scores into z- \
scores does not normalize a distribution. \
\
 In any distribution, the area under the curve represents 100% of people. In most \
 distributions, the area under the curve consists of values that are +/- 3 SDs, which is to say \
 that almost 100% of the people will have scores between +/- 3SDs from the mean. In any \
 normal distribution, z-scores (or standard deviations) always correspond to the same \
 percentile ranks. \
\
 z-scores -3   -2   -1   0    +1   +2   +3   x=0; SD = 1 \
 t-scores 20   30   40   50   60   70   80   x=50;SD=10 \
IQ scores 55   70   85   100 115   130 145   x=100; SD=15 \
 Ranks (PR) .1 2.5 16    50   84   97.5 99.9 \
\
If points are added to only two people in a distribution (as opposed to everyone), the \
 percentile ranks of those two individuals will change. There will be a greater change in \
 percentile rank for the person who initially has a mid-range rank (e.g., 50th PR) as \
 compared to someone who is initially closer to the tail of the distribution. \
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Statistics: Descriptive Statistics \
\
Z-Scores can be easily calculated from raw score data (X). [X] \
\
   Z-Score Formula: Z=X-x     or \
                       SD \
\
                    Z = score - mean \
                         SD \
\
   Raw Score Formula: X=x+/-Z(SD) or \
\
                    Score = mean (+/-) Z-Score times the SD \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 6 - Statistics: Inferential Statistics \
\
          6.6 INFERENTIAL STATISTICS \
\
Instead of just describing data, inferential statistics are those procedures or tests that allow \
researchers to make inferences about the population, based on the sample studied. When \
research is conducted, it is hoped that the study sample is representative of the population. \
In fact, a critical assumption of all statistical tests is that the sample subjects are randomly \
selected, and thus representative of the population. Population values are referred to as \
parameters, examples of which include u (mu), the population mean, and o (sigma), the \
population standard deviation. Sample values are called statistics, such as (the mean) \
and SD or S (the standard deviation). \
\
I. SAMPLING ERROR \
\
A key concern in research is sampling error: samples drawn from populations are usually \
not perfectly representative of the population. One clear indication of sampling error is that \
untreated sample means are frequently not identical to population means. For example, the \
population mean for IQ is 100. If a random sample of 25 people were taken, the mean of \
this sample would probably not be exactly 100. \
\
II. STANDARD ERROR OF THE MEAN AND CENTRAL \
LIMIT THEOREM \
\
>STANDARD ERROR OF THE MEAN   If, hypothetically, a researcher were to take \
many, many samples of equal size (e.g., N=25) and plot the group means of these samples, \
the researcher would get a normal distribution of means. Any spread or deviation in these \
means is error. The average amount of deviation is called the standard error of the mean. \
               Sample                           Sampling \
               Distribution                     Distribution \
               (Scores)                         (Means) \
\
        .                                       SDpop \
        
\f3 \uc0\u956 
\f2  = 100, 
\f3 \uc0\u963 
\f2  = 15                x=100. \
                                                 VN \
In this example, SDpop or = 15, [X] = \\25 = 5; therefore, the standard error of the mean \
would be 15/5 = 3. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Statistics: Inferential Statistics \
\
>CENTRAL LIMIT THEOREM This hypothetical theoretical construct is called central \
limit theorem. Central limit theorem states that assuming an infinite number of equal sized \
samples (of large enough size) are drawn from the population, and the means of these \
samples are plotted, a normally distributed distribution of means will result. The mean of \
the means (the grand mean) will equal the population mean, and the standard deviation of \
the means will equal the standard deviation of the population divided by the square root of \
sample size (the standard error of the mean). The distribution of means will be normal \
regardless of the shape of the distribution of scores. \
\
The practical relevance of central limit theorem and the standard error of the mean is that \
it informs the researcher how likely it is that a particular mean will be obtained just by \
chance. Using this information, the researcher can calculate whether the obtained mean is \
most likely due to treatment or experimental effects, or to chance (sampling error or \
random error). \
\
Let's follow the above example where the standard error of the mean was 3. A researcher \
implements a treatment program designed to enhance IQ with one group of 25 subjects. \
Following treatment, the treated group's IQ is measured, and the mean IQ turns out to be \
103. With the standard error of the mean at 3, the mean of 103 was quite likely obtained \
by chance. The difference between the mean of 103 and the non-treated mean of 100 is \
only 3 points, or one standard error. A difference of one standard error might easily be due \
to sampling error alone. By contrast, if the treated group's mean IQ is 110, it is highly \
unlikely that this mean was obtained by chance alone. At 110, the group's mean IQ would \
be more than three standard error units away from the mean, a difference highly unlikely \
to be due to just sampling error; consequently, the results would be considered statistically \
significant. \
\
III. HYPOTHESIS TESTING \
\
A. KEY CONCEPTS \
\
The most critical aspect of inferential statistics is hypothesis testing. A hypothesis is a \
statement of belief; on the basis of this belief, research studies are run, and subsequent \
treatment programs are implemented. Although hypotheses are tested using samples, \
hypotheses are always expressed in terms of the population. \
\
The nature of the hypothesis depends on the type of question asked in the research. For \
example, hypotheses can be generated about group differences or about relationships. For \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6- Statistics: Inferential Statistics \
\
simplicity's sake, the prototype that will be used here is the hypothesis about group \
differences. \
\
>NULL HYPOTHESIS The null hypothesis states that there are no differences between \
the groups, or Ho: 
\f3 \uc0\u956 
\f2 1 = 
\f3 \uc0\u956 
\f2 2. \
\
Put differently, the null hypothesis states that the IV has not had an effect on the DV. \
Research is conducted with the hope of finding differences between groups that have \
received different treatment; thus, the researcher always wishes to be able to reject the null \
hypothesis. This concept is a bit tricky because of the double negative. The researcher \
hopes to be able to reject the statement that there are no differences, and thereby conclude \
that there are differences between the groups. \
\
>ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESIS The alternative hypothesis states directly that there \
are differences, or H1: # Keep in mind that results are almost always stated in terms \
of the null hypothesis. \
\
When statistics are run to test hypotheses, there are really only two decisions or conclusions \
that can be drawn, based entirely on where the means fall relative to the rejection or \
 acceptance regions. \
\
>REJECTION REGION The rejection region, at the tail end of the curve, is also called \
the region of unlikely values, because it is unlikely that a researcher will obtain means in \
this region simply because of chance (sampling error). The size of the rejection region \
corresponds to the alpha level. For example, when alpha is .05. the rejection region is 5% \
of the curve. When alpha is .01, the rejection region is 1% of the curve. \
\
When obtained values fall in the rejection region, the null hypothesis is rejected and the \
researcher concludes that treatment did have an effect (i.e., there are differences between \
groups). When obtained values fall in the acceptance or retention region, the null \
hypothesis is accepted and the researcher concludes that there were no effects of treatment \
(i.e., there are no differences between groups). \
\
B. CORRECT AND INCORRECT DECISIONS \
\
Based on the region in which the treated mean falls, researchers conclude that their findings \
either have statistical significance or lack statistical significance. Researchers assume that \
statistical significance indicates that there was a treatment effect and that a lack of statistical \
significance indicates that there was no treatment effect. It is important to realize that there \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6- Statistics: Inferential Statistics \
\
are actually two factors that contribute to conclusions regarding statistical significance: \
treatment effects and chance (sampling error). Statistical tests can merely provide \
information about the probability of results being due to chance or treatment, but the only \
way to know with certainty is for the experiment to be replicated numerous times. Thus, \
only after many replications of the experiment can it be known whether the original results \
were obtained in error. \
\
There are only two possible decisions or conclusions a researcher can draw: either to reject \
or accept the null. Both of these decisions have the possibility to be correct or incorrect. \
and thus there are four possible outcomes. \
\
>TYPE I ERROR If the null is rejected and this decision later turns out to be a mistake, \
the researcher has made a Type I error. In other words, significance is found in the original \
experiment, but subsequent researchers do not find significance. A Type I error occurs \
when the null is incorrectly rejected, or differences are found when they do not actually \
exist. \
\
The size of the rejection region is typically set in advance by the experimenter and is called \
alpha. The size of alpha directly corresponds to the likelihood of making a Type I error. \
Conventional cutoffs for alpha are .05, .01, and .001. These cutoffs have been selected, \
somewhat arbitrarily, as indicating that obtained means are different enough to be \
attributed to treatment effect and not to chance. \
\
>TYPE II ERROR When the null hypothesis is accepted, and this decision turns out to \
be a mistake, a Type II error has been made. In other words, significance is not found in \
the original experiment, but subsequent researchers do obtain significant results. A Type \
II error occurs when the null is incorrectly accepted, or no differences are found when \
differences actually do exist. \
\
The probability of making a Type II error corresponds to beta. The value of beta varies \
from experiment to experiment. Beta can be calculated by the researcher (not by you for \
purposes of the EPPP). There is an inverse relationship between alpha and beta. \
\
>POWER If the null is rejected, and this turns out to be a correct decision, this decision \
is referred to as power. In other words, significance is found in the original experiment, \
and subsequent researchers also find significance. Power is defined as the ability to \
correctly reject the null. Several factors affect power. Power is increased when sample size \
is large, the magnitude of the intervention is large, random error is small, the statistical test \
is parametric, and the test is one-tailed. There is an inverse mathematical relationship \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 6 - Statistics: Inferential Statistics \
\
between power and beta: Power = 1 - beta. Thus, beta has the most significant and \
measurable effect on power. Power and alpha have a direct relationship. As alpha increases. \
so does power. \
\
>CORRECT DECISION WITH NO NAME    A final possibility is that the null is \
accepted, and this decision turns out to be correct. In other words, significance is not found \
in the original experiment, and subsequent researchers also do not find significance. There \
is no name for the decision when the null is correctly accepted. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
      6.7 SELECTING STATISTICAL TESTS \
\
In deciding what statistical test is appropriate to analyze a given set of data, a researcher \
(or EPPP candidate) must first tease out what type of question is being addressed in the \
research. Three questions are commonly asked in research: questions of difference \
(analyzed with Chi-square, Mann-Whitney, t-test, ANOVA, etc.); questions of relationship \
and prediction (analyzed with Pearson r, Biserial, multiple regression, etc.); and questions \
of structure or fit (analyzed with principal components or factor analysis, cluster analysis). \
\
I. TESTS OF DIFFERENCE \
\
A. SELECTING THE APPROPRIATE TEST OF DIFFERENCE \
\
There are many statistical tests that are used to analyze questions of difference. Once it has \
been ascertained that the research involves looking at differences between groups, the \
following three steps can be taken to determine the specific statistical test needed. \
\
>TYPE OF DATA OF THE DV Assuming only one DV, it is important to know what \
type of data the DV or outcome measure is (NOIR). If the DV is nominal or ordinal, a non- \
parametric test will be used (e.g., Chi-Square, Mann-Whitney, Wilcoxon). If the DV is \
interval or ratio, a parametric test will usually be used (e.g., a t-test or ANOVA). If there \
is more than one DV (interval or ratio data), the statistic of choice will be MANOVA. \
\
>NUMBER OF INDEPENDENT VARIABLES, & LEVELS OF INDEPENDENT \
VARIABLES It is easiest to assess the levels of the independent variable(s) by looking at \
what groups are being compared. If males and females are being compared, this represents \
two levels (groups being compared) of one IV (gender). If cognitive-behavioral treatment \
is being compared with psychodynamic treatment versus no treatment, this represents three \
levels (groups being compared) of one IV (type of treatment). \
\
>SAMPLE (GROUP) INDEPENDENCE VERSUS CORRELATION It is crucial to \
sort out whether the groups (samples) being compared for each IV are independent or \
correlated. If people are randomly assigned to groups, or are grouped based on a pre- \
existing characteristic (e.g., gender or ethnicity), the groups or data are considered \
independent. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
Three factors can result in the groups or data being correlated: 1) subjects that are measured \
at more than one point in time (e.g., a group of subjects measured on the Beck Depression \
Inventory prior to treatment, during treatment, and after treatment); 2) subjects that are \
matched prior to their assignment to groups (e.g., subjects matched on income, IQ, or some \
other relevant characteristic); and 3) an inherent relationship between pairs of subjects \
(e.g., twins, siblings, and spouses all have an inherent relationship). \
\
>ASSUMPTIONS FOR PARAMETRIC TESTS There are three assumptions that must \
be met in order to use a parametric test (e.g. t-test, ANOVA, MANOVA): 1) the data must \
be interval or ratio; 2) there must be homoscedasticity, which means that there should be \
similar variability or standard deviations in the different groups; and 3) the data must be \
normally distributed. If one of these assumptions is not met, the statistic of choice will \
typically be one that is used with ordinal data (e.g., Mann-Whitney). \
\
>ASSUMPTION FOR THE CHI-SQUARE TEST   The main assumption of the Chi- \
Square test (a non-parametric test) is that there is independence of observations. In other \
words, the Chi-Square cannot be used when subjects are measured more than once (i.e., \
repeated measures). \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
B. TESTS OF DIFFERENCE \
1. NOMINAL DATA ONLY \
\
Type of Data Number of IVs Number of Groups Groups Statistic \
\
nominal    one           2 or more      indep    Chi Square \
nominal    > one         2 or more (per IV) indep Multiple Sample \
                                                   Chi Square \
nominal    one or more   2 or more (per IV) corr McNemar \
\
2. INTERVAL/RATIO AND ORDINAL DATA \
\
Number of Groups Groups I/R Data        Ordinal Data \
\
1 IV & 1 DV \
1 group        ind       t-test single sample Kolmogorov \
2 groups       ind       t-test independent Mann-Whitney or \
                           samples       Median Test or \
                                         Kolmogorov-Smirnov \
2 groups       cor       t-test matched Wilcoxon (sign rank) or \
                           samples       sign test \
>2 groups      ind       1-way ANOVA    Kruskall Wallis \
> 2 groups     corr      1-way repeated Friedman \
                           measures ANOVA \
2 IVs, 2 groups \
or more per IV both IVs -- groups ind 2-way ANOVA or \
                          factorial ANOVA \
\
          one IV -- groups ind mixed ANOVA or \
          one IV -- groups corr split plot ANOVA \
\
          both IVs -- groups corr repeated measures \
                           factorial ANOVA \
\
          both IVs -- groups ind randomized \
          one blocked      block ANOVA \
\
with covariate* ind and/or ANCOVA \
          corr groups      (Analysis of Covariance) \
\
>1 DV     ind and/or     MANOVA \
2 groups corr groups       (multivariate ANOVA) \
or more per IV \
* other names for covariates include confounds, extraneous variables and moderator variables \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
C. CALCULATING DEGREES OF FREEDOM FOR CHI-SQUARE, T- \
TESTS AND ANOVAS \
\
Degrees of freedom refers to the number of possible variations in outcome that can be \
obtained. What follows are some of the basic formulas for calculating degrees of freedom \
for chi-square, t-tests, and one-way ANOVAs. \
\
C1. CHI-SQUARE \
\
>SINGLE SAMPLE CHI-SQUARE In the single sample chi-square, nominal data are \
collected for one independent variable. For example, 100 psychologists are sampled as to \
their voting preference (Democrat, Republican, or Libertarian). In this case, there are three \
groups (or columns). The formula for degrees of freedom in the single sample chi-square \
is: df =# columns - 1. In this case, 3 - 1 = 2 degrees of freedom. \
\
>MULTIPLE SAMPLE CHI-SQUARE In the multiple sample chi-square, nominal data \
are collected for two independent variables. For example, 100 psychologists are sampled \
as to their voting preference (Democrat, Republican, or Libertarian) as well as their \
ethnicity (White, Asian, African American, Hispanic, and Native American). In this case, \
there are three groups for voting preference (columns) and five groups for ethnicity (rows). \
The formula for degrees of freedom for the multiple sample chi-square is: df = (# rows - \
1) x (# columns - 1). In this case, (3 - 1) x (5 - 1) or 2 x 4 = 8 degrees of freedom. \
\
C2. T-TESTS \
\
>T-TEST FOR SINGLE SAMPLE In the t-test for single sample, interval or ratio data \
are collected for one group of subjects. For example, scores on the Beck Depression \
inventory are obtained for 30 subjects. The formula for degrees of freedom for the t-test \
for single sample is: df = N - 1. In this case, 30 - 1 - 29 degrees of freedom. \
\
>T-TEST FOR MATCHED OR CORRELATED SAMPLES In the t-test for matched \
or correlated samples, interval or ratio data are collected for two correlated groups of \
subjects. For example, scores on the Beck Depression inventory are obtained for a total of \
30 subjects, 15 in each group. The formula for degrees of freedom for the t-test for matched \
or correlated samples is: df = # pairs - 1. In this case, 15 - 1 = 14 degrees of freedom. \
\
>T-TEST FOR INDEPENDENT SAMPLES   In the t-test for independent samples, \
interval or ratio data are collected for two independent groups of subjects. For example, \
scores on the Beck Depression inventory are obtained for a total of 30 subjects, 15 \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
randomly assigned to each group. The formula for degrees of freedom for the t-test for \
independent samples is: df = N - 2. In this case, 30 - 2 = 28 degrees of freedom. \
\
C3. ONE-WAY ANOVAS \
\
In a one-way ANOVA, interval or ratio data are collected for more than two groups of \
subjects. For example, a total of 60 subjects are assigned to one of four treatment groups \
for depression (cognitive-behavioral, psychodynamic, medications, and control group). \
Scores on the Beck Depression Inventory are obtained and compared for each of the \
groups. \
\
There are three different degrees of freedom calculated in a one-way ANOVA. \
\
   df total = N - 1. In this case, 60 - 1 = 59 df total. \
   df between groups = # groups - 1. In this case, 4 - 1 = 3 df between groups. \
   df within groups = df total - df between groups. In this case, 59 - 3 - 56 df within \
   groups. \
\
D. CALCULATING EXPECTED FREQUENCIES IN A CHI- \
SQUARE \
\
There are two possible scenarios for which chi-square expected frequencies might need to \
be calculated. \
\
>WHEN N AND THE GROUPS ARE GIVEN: \
\
   Expected frequency = [X] N \
                    total # of cells \
\
For example, in a 4 x 2 chi-square with a sample size of 160, what would be the expected \
frequency in each cell? \
\
To determine the expected frequency in each cell in a chi-square, you must first calculate \
the total number of cells. This is easily done by multiplying the number of rows and \
columns. Here, you need to multiply 4 by 2; therefore, the number of cells is 8. You then \
divide the total sample size by the number of cells. In this case, N = 160. 160/8 - 20. \
Therefore, the expected frequency in each cell would be 20. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
>WHEN DATA ARE GIVEN IN EACH CELL \
\
   Expected frequency for any cell = Sum of the Row x Sum of the Column \
                                        N [X] \
\
For example, in a sample of 100 psychologists, the following data are obtained. \
\
                   Democrats   Republicans \
        Males      25          15         40 \
        Females     20         40         60 \
                   45          55 \
\
The expected frequency for male Democrats would be 40 (sum of the male row) x 45 (sum \
of the Democrat column) divided by 100 (sample size). 40 x 45 = 1800. 1800/100 = 18. In \
this case, the expected frequency for male Democrats would be 18. The expected \
frequencies for female Democrats, male Republicans, and female Republicans would be \
27, 22, and 33, respectively. \
\
E. INTERPRETING ANOVAS \
\
E1. ONE-WAY ANOVAS \
\
The one-way ANOVA is the statistic of choice when more than two groups are being \
compared on only one independent variable. For example, four different treatments for \
depression are contrasted. The reason it is preferable to run a single one-way ANOVA \
rather than multiple t-tests is that the probability of making a Type I error increases for \
every t-test run. For example, to compare four groups, six t-tests would have to be run. If \
alpha = . 05, with six t-tests, the probability of making a Type I error is 6 x .05 = . 30. \
\
>THE FRATIO In a one-way ANOVA, variability or spread of scores both within groups \
and between groups is measured. Any variability within groups is due to error, while \
variability between groups is essentially due to some combination of treatment effects and \
error. The researcher wants to find high variability between the groups (representing the \
effects of treatment) and low variability within the groups (attributable to error). \
Significance is determined by examining the F ratio. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
In the F ratio, MS stands for Mean Square, which is a measure of the average variability. \
MSbg stands for the mean square between groups and MSwg stands for the mean square \
within groups. \
\
   F ratio = MSbg \
         MSwg \
\
When the F ratio equals or approximates 1.0, there is no significance. As the F ratio gets \
above 2.0, it is typically considered to be significant. \
\
>POST-HOC TESTS When an ANOVA is found to be significant, it is only known that \
there are some differences between groups. Because there are more than two groups being \
compared, it is not clear which of the groups is significantly different from which others. \
Post-hoc analyses are therefore necessary. These analyses typically include many pair-wise \
comparisons, something akin to running many t-tests. The problem is that each comparison \
increases the chance of Type I error. Keep in mind that a variety of post-hoc tests exist. \
The one that provides the most protection from Type I error (also described as the most \
conservative) is the Scheffe, followed by the Tukey. The one that provides the least \
protection from Type I error is Fisher's LSD (least significant difference). Duncan, \
Dunette, and Neuman-Kuels provide mid-range protection. In terms of protection from \
Type II, the reverse holds true, with Scheffe and Tukey providing the least protection, and \
Fisher's LSD providing the most protection. \
\
>THE ONE-WAY ANOVA SUMMARY TABLE Understanding the summary table \
from a one-way ANOVA is an advanced level skill and is not worth obsessing about. \
\
Source         SS (variability) df       MS        F ratio \
\
Between (bg)   # is given # groups - 1 SSbg/df bg MSbg/MSwg \
Within (wg)    # is given df total - df Bg SSwg/df wg \
Total          # is given N - 1 \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
E2. TWO-WAY ANOVAS \
\
When groups are being compared on two IVs, (e.g., sex and treatment), a researcher has \
the option of either running two separate one-way ANOVAs (one comparing males and \
females, and one comparing the different treatments) or running a single two-way \
ANOVA. The main advantage of a two-way ANOVA is that it not only permits analysis \
of main effects (significance) for each IV, but it also permits analysis of interaction effects. \
\
In running a two-way ANOVA, three F ratios are obtained, one for each IV and one for the \
interaction. An interaction exists when the level (or group) of one variable seems to \
differentially affect the levels of the second variable. For example, cognitive-behavioral \
treatment seems to work better for males than females, while the reverse seems to apply \
for dynamic treatment. The results of a two-way ANOVA can yield any combination of \
significance among the two IVs (main effects) and interaction. When the interaction is \
significant, any main effects that are also found must be interpreted with caution. Another \
way of saying this is that the interaction effects must be interpreted first, or that the main \
effects must be interpreted in light of the interaction effects. \
\
You may be given data (group means) from a two-way ANOVA, and asked whether or not \
there are significant main effects or a significant interaction effect. \
\
To do this, you sum the rows and compare the sums for the first IV; sum the columns and \
compare the sums for the second IV; and sum the diagonals and compare the sums for the \
interaction. If any of the comparisons reveal differences, there is a significant effect. An \
example follows. \
\
The following data were obtained in research looking at the effects of three treatments for \
anxiety in three different age groups. What do these data indicate in terms of the main and \
interaction effects? \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
                             Tx1    Tx 2 Tx3 \
\
       Teenagers             20     10    25    55 \
\
       Adults                15     25    15    55 \
\
       Older Adults          10     20    25    55 \
\
                             45     55    65 \
\
>MAIN EFFECTS OF TREATMENT    To determine if there is a main effect for \
treatments, you must add up the totals for all the columns. If you add up the means in the \
columns Tx1, Tx2, and Tx3, you will see that they are 45, 55, and 65. This indicates that \
there is a significant main effect for treatment. In other words, the three treatments had \
different success in lowering anxiety. \
\
>MAIN EFFECTS OF AGE If you add up the means in the rows Teenagers, Adults, and \
Older Adults, you will see that the totals are equal. Since these totals are the same, we can \
conclude that there is no main effect for age. In other words, there were no differences \
found in anxiety in the different age groups. \
\
>INTERACTION EFFECTS The easiest way to determine interaction effects is to \
divide the table into squares and add up the diagonal means. As soon as the diagonals are \
not equal in any square, we can conclude there are interaction effects. The first square \
would be rows Teenagers and Adults and columns Tx1 and Tx2. The sum of one diagonal \
(Teenagers Tx1 and Adults Tx2) is 45 and the sum of the other diagonal (Teenagers Tx2 \
and Adults Tx1) is 25. Since they are different, you can conclude there are interaction \
effects. If they had been equal, you would have needed to continue computing diagonals \
until you had exhausted the entire table. The second square would be rows Teenagers and \
Adults with columns Tx2 and Tx3; the third square would be rows Adults and Older Adults \
with columns Tx1 and Tx2; the fourth and last square would be rows Adults and Older \
Adults with columns Tx2 and Tx3. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
If the diagonals within all of the squares had been equal, we would have concluded that \
there were no interaction effects. Interaction effects in this case mean that age interacts \
with type of treatment to affect level of anxiety. In other words, one's age will affect one's \
response to the type of treatment. \
\
F. MANOVAS \
\
MANOVAs are typically run when there is more than one outcome measure (DV). Keep \
in mind that one could run separate ANOVAs for each of the DVs, but the disadvantage of \
doing so is the increased likelihood of making a Type I error. \
\
G. TREND ANALYSIS \
\
When the independent variable is quantitative (e.g., dosage of drug, hours of food \
deprivation, intensity of the unconditioned stimulus), the outcome will frequently be non- \
linear. In this case, researchers are less interested in the differences between the groups, \
and more interested in the trend of the data, or the ups and downs. Trend analysis, an \
extension of the ANOVA, is used to analyze such non-linear data. \
\
II. TESTS OF RELATIONSHIP AND PREDICTION \
\
The two broad categories of tests of relationship and prediction are bivariate and \
multivariate tests. As a rule, statistics that depict relationships between variables are termed \
correlations, while statistics that predict are termed regressions or analyses. \
\
A. BIVARIATE TESTS \
\
>THE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT Bivariate correlations look at the relationship \
between two variables, X and Y, where neither is an IV in the truest sense. X is typically \
viewed as the predictor, while Y is considered to be the criterion. Bivariate relationships \
are mathematically depicted with a correlation coefficient, which ranges in value from -1.0 \
to +1.0. Correlation coefficients describe the relationship between X and Y in terms of both \
strength (the absolute value) and direction (- vs. +). \
\
Correlations are graphically depicted with a set of data points. Each data point represents \
one person's score on both X and Y. The closer the data points cluster around a line, the \
stronger the correlation. The more spread out the data points are, the weaker the correlation. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
     0.0 Correlation +.8 Correlation     -. 8 Correlation \
\
                                                     : \
\
When the correlation between X and Y is 0.0, the variability (spread) of Y scores for any \
given X score is as large as the total variability of the Y scores. For example, if there were \
no relationship between education (X) and income (Y), for any given educational level \
(e.g., completed only elementary school), the range of possible income levels could be \
anywhere from $0.00 to the maximum income level of the sample (e.g., one million \
dollars). \
\
>THE COEFFICIENT OF DETERMINATION The coefficient of determination is \
calculated by squaring the correlation coefficient. For example, if the correlation between \
education and income is .50, the coefficient of determination is .52, or .25. The coefficient \
of determination represents the amount of variability in Y that is shared with, explained \
by, or accounted for by X. In other words, it can be concluded that 25% of the variability \
in income is explained by education, which leaves 75% of the variability in income to be \
accounted for by other factors (e.g., motivation, connections, luck, etc.). \
\
>THE SIMPLE LINEAR REGRESSION EQUATION   When two variables have no \
correlation (the correlation = 0.0), knowing the value of X provides no information about \
the value of Y. For example, if there were no relationship between education and income. \
knowing a person's education level would not make it possible to predict income level. \
\
When a correlation other than 0.0 is obtained, there is an implication of prediction. A \
simple linear regression (prediction) equation is derived, based on the line of best fit \
through the scatter plot. It is calculated by computer using the least squares criterion. The \
regression equation is expressed in the formula: Y = a + bX. In this case, one variable (X) \
is defined as the predictor while the second (Y) is defined as the criterion. The coefficient \
'a' is a constant, and is the intercept, which determines the height of the line. The \
coefficient 'b' is referred to as the slope, which determines the steepness of the line. \
\
>ASSUMPTIONS OF BIVARIATE CORRELATIONS      There are three basic \
assumptions of bivariate correlations: a linear relationship between X and Y. \
homoscedasticity, and an unrestricted range of scores on both X and Y. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
     LINEAR RELATIONSHIP   With the exception of eta, all other bivariate \
     correlations require a linear relationship between X and Y. Eta is used to calculate \
     the correlation between X and Y when it is thought that X and Y have a curvilinear \
     relationship. \
\
     HOMOSCEDASTICITY In terms of bivariate correlations, homoscedasticity \
     refers to a similar spread of scores across the entire scatter plot. When the \
     assumption of homoscedasticity is violated, the relationship will be underestimated. \
\
     UNRESTRICTED RANGE An unrestricted range of scores on both X and Y is \
     required to get an accurate sense of the relationship between X and Y. If the range \
     of either X or Y is restricted, the correlation coefficient will drop dramatically, and \
     therefore will underestimate the true relationship between X and Y. \
\
>BIVARIATE CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS \
\
The choice of bivariate correlation coefficient depends on the type of data of X and Y. \
\
Variable X               Variable Y          Correlation \
interval or ratio        interval or ratio   Pearson r \
ordinal (rank ordered)   ordinal (rank ordered) Spearman's Rho \
                                              or Kendall's Tau \
interval or ratio        true dichotomy      Point-Biserial \
interval or ratio        artificial dichotomy Biserial \
true dichotomy           true dichotomy      Phi \
artificial dichotomy     artificial dichotomy Tetrachoric \
   curvilinear relationship between X and Y Eta \
\
>TYPES OF CORRELATIONS AND VARIABLES \
\
     ZERO-ORDER CORRELATION This is the most basic correlation. A zero- \
     order correlation analyzes the relationship between X and Y when it is believed that \
     there are no extraneous variables affecting the relationship. \
\
     PARTIAL CORRELATION (FIRST ORDER CORRELATION) A partial \
     correlation examines the relationship between the predictor and the criterion with \
     the effect of a third variable removed. The third variable is removed because it is \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
     thought to be influencing or confounding both the predictor and the criterion. For \
     example, if it is believed that a third variable such as parental education affects both \
     SAT and GPA, this variable could be measured and its effect removed from the \
     correlation of SAT and GPA. \
\
     PART (SEMIPARTIAL) CORRELATION A part or semipartial correlation \
     examines the relationship between the predictor and the criterion with the influence \
     of a third variable removed from only one of the original variables. For example, \
     when SAT and GPA are correlated, the effect of SES might be removed only from \
     SAT scores. \
\
     MODERATOR VARIABLE A moderator variable is defined as a variable that \
     influences the strength of the relationship between the predictor and criterion. \
     Sometimes a correlation is stronger at certain points in the scatter plot and weaker \
     at others. For example, assume there is a strong correlation between income and \
     smoking, such that lower income people tend to smoke more. Now, assume that \
     this relationship differs depending on a person's age. In other words, when people \
     are older, there is a stronger correlation between income and smoking, and when \
     people are younger, there is a weaker correlation between income and smoking. \
     "Age" would then operate as a moderator variable that affects the strength of the \
     correlation. \
\
     MEDIATOR VARIABLE A mediator variable explains why there is a \
     relationship between the predictor and the criterion. For example, education might \
     explain the link between SES and smoking. When you control for the effect of the \
     mediator (e.g., education), the relationship between the predictor and the criterion \
     then goes down to almost 0. \
\
B. MULTIVARIATE TESTS \
\
Multivariate tests of correlation and prediction involve several Xs (predictors or IVs) and \
one or more Ys (criterions or DVs). \
\
>MULTIPLE R Multiple R (or multiple correlation) is a correlation between two or more \
IVs (X) and one DV (Y), where Y is always interval or ratio data, and at least one X is \
interval or ratio data. For example, a multiple R of .70 might be calculated for the \
relationship between time studied for the EPPP (X1) and number of practice tests completed \
(X2), and score on the EPPP (Y). \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
Squaring multiple R (R2), generates the coefficient of multiple determination, an index \
of the amount of variability in the criterion (Y) that is accounted for by the combination of \
all the predictors (Xs). When multiple R of .70 is squared, the result is .49. This suggests \
that 49% of the variability in scores on the EPPP can be accounted for by a combination of \
number of hours studied and number of practice tests completed prior to the exam. \
\
>MULTIPLE REGRESSION Using the multiple R, a multiple regression equation can \
be derived, which then allows the prediction of the criterion (Y) based on the values of the \
predictors (Xs). The multiple regression equation is expressed in the formula: Y = a + b1X1 \
+ b2X2 + b;X3, etc, where 'a' is a constant and the intercept, and each 'b' is a non- \
standardized partial slope. 'b' values can be converted to beta values, which are \
standardized partial slopes. \
\
The key distinction to keep in mind is that 'b' values should be used when comparing \
variables between studies or samples (i.e., across two regression equations), while beta \
values should be used when comparing variables within a study or sample (i.e., within one \
equation). \
\
To optimize the ability to predict, it is desirable to have a low correlation between \
predictors (Xs) and a moderate to high correlation between each predictor and the criterion \
(Y). Multicollinearity is a problem that occurs in a multiple regression equation when the \
predictors are highly correlated with one another, and therefore essentially redundant. \
\
Multiple regression is a compensatory technique because low scores on one predictor can \
be compensated for by high scores on another predictor. (See the Industrial/ Organizational \
section for more details on how multiple regression differs from the noncompensatory \
techniques of multiple cutoff and multiple hurdle.) \
\
The two most common subtypes of multiple regression are stepwise regression and \
hierarchical regression. \
\
     STEPWISE REGRESSION Stepwise regression is computer-generated, and can \
     be implemented either forward or backward. In a forward regression, the computer \
     adds predictor variables one at a time, starting with the predictor that has the highest \
     correlation with criterion outcome. Predictors continue to be added until there is no \
     significant change in R2. In backward regression, predictor variables are removed \
     one at a time, starting with the variable that contributes the least to criterion \
     outcome, until there is a significant change in R2. Stepwise regression allows the \
     researcher to come up with the fewest possible predictors. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
     HIERARCHICAL REGRESSION   In a hierarchical regression, the researcher \
     controls the analysis, adding variables to the regression analysis in the order that is \
     most consistent with the theory being proposed. \
\
>CANONICAL R AND CANONICAL ANALYSIS     An extension of multiple R. \
canonical R is a correlation between two or more IVs and two or more DVs. Canonical R \
allows you to evaluate the relationship between two sets of variables, one identified as a \
predictor set, and the other as the criterion set. For example, the relationship between time \
spent studying for the EPPP (X1) and number of practice tests completed (X2), with score \
obtained on the exam (Y1) and amount of subjective distress experienced while taking the \
exam (Y2). A canonical analysis is an extension of canonical R, enabling us to predict two \
criterion scores based on two predictor scores. \
\
>DISCRIMINANT FUNCTION ANALYSIS The discriminant function analysis is a \
special case of the multiple regression. As with the multiple regression, the discriminant \
analysis is used when there are two or more predictors (Xs) and one criterion (Y). However, \
the distinction is that the discriminant analysis is used when the criterion variable (Y) is \
nominal (categorical) rather than interval or ratio. Discriminant analysis allows a \
researcher to predict membership in a group based on knowledge of a set of predictor \
variables. For example, a discriminant function analysis would be used to predict the \
likelihood of passing or failing the EPPP (categorical Y) based on time spent studying for \
the EPPP (X1) and the number of practice tests completed (X2). \
\
>LOGLINEAR ANALYSIS Loglinear analysis, sometimes referred to as logit analysis, \
is used to predict a categorical criterion (Y) based on categorical predictors (Xs). For \
example, a loglinear analysis would be used if type of graduate school (categorical X1.) \
and sex (categorical X2) were used to predict likelihood of passing or failing the EPPP \
(categorical Y). \
\
Multiple regression, canonical correlation, discriminant analysis, and loglinear analysis are \
all considered to be compensatory when applied to decision making. \
\
The correlational and predictive tests described above can never be used to infer causal \
relationships. By contrast, two approaches, path analysis and structural equation modeling. \
apply correlational techniques to causal modeling. \
\
>PATH ANALYSIS Path analysis applies multiple regression techniques to testing a \
model that specifies causal links among variables. Path analysis is not designed to sift \
through data for interesting relationships. Rather, it depends upon a researcher having \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
already developed a clearly articulated causal model that rests on a strong theoretical or \
empirical base. \
\
In path analysis, straight arrows denote causal relationships and are called paths. Curved \
arrows denote correlational relationships. Variables are described as either exogenous or \
endogenous. Models can be either recursive or non-recursive. Estimates of the causal \
relationships among variables are called path coefficients, and are determined by a series \
of multiple regression equations. Path coefficients are analyzed to see if the pattern \
predicted by the model has emerged. \
\
>STRUCTURAL EQUATION MODELING     Structural equation modeling enables \
researchers to make inferences about causation. It can be used to test out many different \
causal pathways, involving multiple predictors and criterion variables. LISREL, which \
stands for LInear Structural RELations, is one type of structural equation modeling. \
LISREL makes distinctions between independent and dependent variables in addition to \
latent (unobserved) and manifest variables. LISREL looks at both direct and indirect \
effects, as well as both unidirectional and bi-directional paths. \
\
III. TESTS OF STRUCTURE \
\
Tests of structure or fit are applied to a set of variables (e.g., items or subtests) when the \
researcher is interested in discovering which variables in the set fit best together or form \
coherent subsets that are relatively independent of one another. For example, a factor \
analysis was used to see which subtests of the WAIS best fit together and how many \
underlying factors account for the subtests. Tests of structure include the factor analysis \
and the cluster analysis. \
\
A. FACTOR ANALYSIS \
\
Factor analysis is a statistical technique used to reduce a large number of variables into a \
smaller number of factors. \
\
>FACTORS Factor analysis operates by extracting as many significant factors from the \
data as is possible. A factor is a dimension that consists of any number of variables (e.g., \
items or subtests). For example, an attractiveness scale that measures 17 different elements \
of attractiveness (e.g., kind, exciting) can be factor analyzed to see whether the scale is \
measuring one or several dimensions (factors) underlying attractiveness. The successive \
factors extracted in factor analysis are not of equal strength. The first is always the \
\
\
\
                                    Section 6 - Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
strongest, the second, next strongest, and so forth. The stronger the factor, the more it will \
account for or explain the variability in scores. \
\
>EIGENVALUES The strength of a factor is indicated by its eigenvalue. Factors with \
eigenvalues less than 1.0 usually are not interpreted or considered significant. Eigenvalue \
is also sometimes described as characteristic root. \
\
>CORRELATION MATRIX    Factor analytic techniques begin with the correlation \
matrix, a table of intercorrelations among tests or items. The results of a factor analysis are \
ultimately expressed in a factor matrix, which is a table that shows the loading of every \
item on every factor, as well as each factor's eigenvalue. \
\
>FACTOR LOADINGS To determine which variables constitute a common factor, \
factor loadings are computed. Each factor loading is a correlation between a variable (e.g., \
item or subtest) and the underlying factor. By convention, loadings are interpreted if they \
are equal to or exceed plus or minus .30. \
\
After factor loadings are obtained, they must be interpreted. To make the factors distinct \
and more interpretable, factor rotation is used. The two types of rotation are orthogonal \
and oblique. \
\
>ORTHOGONAL ROTATIONS AND COMMUNALITY In an orthogonal rotation, \
the axes remain perpendicular (90 degrees). An orthogonal rotation always results in \
factors that have no correlation with one another. Orthogonal rotations are generally \
preferred because they are easier to interpret. \
\
In an orthogonal rotation, communalities can be calculated. Communality refers to how \
much of a test's variability is explained by the combination of all the factors. To compute \
communality for a given test, the factor loadings are squared and then added together. \
\
For example, the following data are obtained subsequent to an orthogonal rotation. \
\
          Factor 1       Factor 2 \
\
Test 1      .5             .6 \
\
Test 2      .4             .8 \
\
Test 3      .1             .7 \
\
\
 \
\
                                   Section 6- Statistics: Selecting Statistical Tests \
\
The factor loading for Test on Factor 1 is .5. The factor loading for Test 1 on Factor 2 is \
.6. The communality for Test 1 is therefore + .62, or .25 + .36 = . 61. The communality \
for Test 2 is .80. The communality for Test 3 is .50. \
\
>OBLIQUE ROTATIONS In an oblique rotation, the angle between the axes is non- \
perpendicular and the factors are correlated. Some argue that oblique rotations are \
preferable to orthogonal rotations, because factors do tend to be correlated in the real world. \
\
The two subtypes of factor analysis are the principal components analysis and the \
(principal) factors analysis. \
\
>PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS The principal components analysis is used \
when one is trying to extract factors and there is no empirical or theoretical guidance on \
the values of the communalities. This statistical procedure always results in a few \
uncorrelated factors, called components. The key issue in principal components analysis is \
that the factors are empirically derived, and the researcher has no prior hypotheses. In a \
principal components analysis, the first factor (component) accounts for the largest amount \
of variability, with each additional component explaining somewhat less. \
\
>(PRINCIPLE) FACTOR ANALYSIS In order to conduct a (principle) factor analysis, \
communality values would need to be ascertained before the analysis. \
\
B. CLUSTER ANALYSIS \
\
Cluster analysis involves gathering data on a variety of dependent variables and statistically \
looking for naturally occurring subgroups in the data. It is performed without any a priori \
hypotheses. For example, a cluster analysis of MMPI-2 data for hundreds of police officers \
might find that officers cluster into three profile groups: those who are upright and \
moralistic, those who are antisocial, and those who are more middle of the road. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Reliability \
\
             TEST CONSTRUCTION \
\
The domain of test construction focuses on the adequacy of the tests used for psychological \
measurement. Tests must have adequate levels of reliability and validity. \
\
                     6.8 RELIABILITY \
\
I. OVERVIEW \
\
Reliability is defined as the amount of consistency, repeatability, and dependability in \
scores obtained on a given test. Consider the fact that if a candidate were to take two \
alternate forms of the EPPP a week apart, the candidate might score 550 on one form and \
570 on the other. What accounts for both the difference and yet the closeness in scores? A \
large part of each score is due to knowledge and ability (which is consistent from test to \
test), while another part of each score is due to error or random factors (which fluctuate \
from test to test), According to Classical Test Theory, any obtained score is a combination \
of truth and error, or X T + E. \
\
When a group of people takes a test, there will be a certain amount of variability among. \
or differences between, all the scores obtained. Some of the difference in scores is due to \
true score variability (variability due to real differences in ability or knowledge in the \
test-takers), while the remainder is error variability (variability caused by chance or \
random factors). \
\
      THE TRUE SCORE MODEL OR CLASSICAL TEST THEORY \
\
          Total variability = True score variability + Error variability. \
\
            Reliability is the proportion of true score variability. \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Reliability \
\
EXAMPLE: The total variability in scores for any test is always 100%. If the true score \
variance is equal to 80% and error variance is equal to 20%, reliability would be .80. Thus, \
reliability equals the proportion of true score variability. \
\
The reliability coefficient is symbolized as either or I'et. This should be easy to \
remember, because reliability is commonly derived by correlating scores obtained on the \
test given at one point in time (x Of t) with scores obtained on the test given at a second \
point in time (x or :). The range of the reliability coefficient is from 0.00 to 1.00, and a \
minimum acceptable reliability is .80. There is no such thing as negative reliability. The \
reliability coefficient is interpreted directly as the percentage of true score variability. This \
differs from both the Pearson r and the validity coefficient, both of which are squared to \
determine the amount of shared or explained variability. \
\
Common sources of error in tests include content (or item) sampling, time sampling, and \
test heterogeneity. \
\
>CONTENT SAMPLING Error due to content sampling occurs when a test, by chance, \
has items that tap into a test-taker's knowledge base, or items that don't tap into a test- \
taker's knowledge. \
\
>TIME SAMPLING Time sampling error occurs when a test is given at two different \
points in time, and the scores on each administration are different because of factors related \
to the passage of time (e.g., forgetting over time). \
\
>TEST HETEROGENEITY Error due to test heterogeneity occurs when a test has \
heterogeneous items tapping more than one domain. \
\
II. FACTORS AFFECTING RELIABILITY \
\
The factors that affect the reliability of a test include the number of items, homogeneity of \
items, range of scores, and ability to guess. \
\
>NUMBER OF ITEMS Reliability is increased when the number of items is increased, \
and is decreased when the number of items is reduced. \
\
>HOMOGENEITY OF ITEMS Homogeneity of items refers to items tapping similar \
content areas. All things being equal, the more homogeneous the items are, the greater the \
reliability. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Reliability \
\
>RANGE OF SCORES An unrestricted range, or a full spread of scores, maximizes \
reliability. A restricted range has the reverse effect and reduces the reliability coefficient. \
The range of scores obtained is related to the heterogeneity of the subjects: the more \
heterogeneous the subjects are on the dimension being measured, the greater the range of \
scores. (This is just an application of the general principle covered in the statistics section \
that correlation coefficients are always diminished when the range of scores is restricted.) \
\
>ABILITY TO GUESS The easier it is to guess (e.g., true-false tests), the lower reliability \
is. This is because reliability indicates true score variability or how much of a score is based \
on what the test taker really knows. If it's easy to guess, one's score will be less dependent \
on what one knows, and more due to chance factors. \
\
III. FOUR ESTIMATES OF RELIABILITY \
\
Although the exact value of the reliability coefficient can never be known, it can be \
estimated in one of four ways. \
\
A. TEST-RETEST RELIABILITY \
\
Test-retest reliability (expressed as the coefficient of stability) involves correlating pairs \
of scores from the same sample of people who are administered the identical test at two \
points in time. For example, the EPPP is administered to a group of candidates, and the \
same test is given to the same group of candidates several months later. Generally, as the \
time interval between the administrations of the test increases, the correlation decreases. \
Therefore, the major source of error for test-retest reliability is time sampling. \
\
B. PARALLEL FORMS RELIABILITY \
\
Parallel, alternate, or equivalent forms reliability (expressed as the coefficient of \
equivalence) is calculated by correlating the scores obtained by the same group of people \
on two roughly equivalent but not identical forms of the same test administered at two \
different points in time. Because it requires two forms of the same test to be developed, \
establishing parallel forms reliability can be costly and time-consuming. An advantage of \
this type of reliability is that practice effects are minimized, since subjects are not exposed \
to the same items. The EPPP is an example of a test that has parallel forms. The two major \
sources of error are time and content sampling. Error due to time sampling occurs because \
of the span of time between the first and second administrations of the tests. Error due to \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright & 2019 Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 6/Test Construction/47 \
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Reliability \
\
content sampling occurs because subjects may be more or less familiar with items on one \
version of the test than those on the other version. \
\
C. INTERNAL CONSISTENCY RELIABILITY \
\
Internal consistency reliability looks at the consistency of the scores within the test; \
therefore, the test is administered only once to one group of people. There are two typical \
ways to assess internal consistency: the first is split-half reliability, and the second is either \
Kuder-Richardson (KR-20 & KR-21) or Cronbach's coefficient alpha. \
\
>SPLIT-HALF RELIABILITY Split-half reliability is calculated by splitting the test in \
half (e.g., odd versus even items), and then correlating the scores obtained on each half by \
each person. When the test is split in half, the correlation is based on half the number of \
items. For example, a 200-item test is split into two sets of 100 items. Because reducing \
the number of items has the effect of lowering reliability, split-half reliability \
underestimates the true reliability of a test. Therefore, when calculating split-half \
reliability, the Spearman-Brown formula is typically used. The Spearman-Brown \
prophecy formula tells us how much more reliable the test would be if it were longer. The \
source of error for split-half reliability is item or content sampling. For example, someone \
might, by chance, know more of the odd items than the even items. \
\
     SPEEDED TESTS Split-half reliability is inappropriate for speeded tests. On a \
     speeded test, only very easy items are included; typically, subjects get all items \
     correct. However, subjects are allotted a limited amount of time in which to \
     complete the test. Scores are expressed in terms of the number of items that were \
     completed within the allotted time frame (e.g., digit symbol-coding on the WAIS- \
     III). Because subjects typically get all completed items correct, there should be a \
     nearly perfect correlation between halves of the test. Thus, the use of split-half \
     reliability will result in an estimate of reliability that is artificially inflated or \
     spuriously high. The preferred reliability coefficient to use for speeded tests is \
     alternate forms. Next best is test-retest reliability despite possible problems due to \
     practice effects. \
\
     POWER TESTS Power tests have items that are of varying difficulty level, and \
     subjects are provided sufficient time to complete them all. Scores are generally \
     expressed in terms of percentage correct. The EPPP is an example of a power test. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Reliability \
\
>KUDER-RICHARDSON (KR-20 & KR-21) & CRONBACH'S COEFFICIENT \
ALPHA Kuder-Richardson (KR-20 and KR-21) and Cronbach's coefficient alpha are very \
sophisticated forms of internal consistency reliability. Essentially, they involve analysis of \
the correlation of each item with every other item in the test. This form of reliability is \
calculated by taking the mean of the correlation coefficients for every possible split-half. \
KR-20 and KR-21 are used when the items are scored dichotomously, as either correct or \
incorrect (e.g., the EPPP). Coefficient alpha is used when items are scored non- \
dichotomously, and there is a range of possible scores for each item or category (e.g., a \
likert scale). KR-20 is used when items vary in difficulty level, while KR-21 is used when \
all items are essentially of equal difficulty. \
\
Error in KR-20, KR-21, and coefficient alpha is due to content sampling and test \
heterogeneity. \
\
D. INTERRATER RELIABILITY \
\
Interscorer or interrater reliability looks at the degree of agreement between two or more \
scorers when a test is subjectively scored. The best way to improve this reliability is to \
provide opportunity for group discussion, practice exercises, and feedback. These methods \
are even superior to training the raters. Interscorer reliability can be expressed as percent \
agreement (the percentage of time that the raters agree on their overall ratings), Pearson r \
(correlating the scores given by the raters to each examinee), Kappa statistic, or Yule's Y. \
\
IV. STANDARD ERROR OF MEASUREMENT \
\
If a test were perfectly reliable, the test would perfectly and consistently assess a person's \
knowledge or abilities, but since no test is perfectly reliable, there is always going to be \
error in measurement. For example, the person who obtains a score of 120 on an IQ test \
might not have an exact IQ of 120. \
\
To get some idea of the average amount of measurement error in each person's score on \
any given test, a theoretical distribution can be constructed. This distribution would consist \
of one person's scores if he or she were tested hundreds of times with alternate or equivalent \
forms of the test. (This process parallels what is done with the standard error of the mean.) \
For example, hundreds of alternate forms of the EPPP could be administered to one person \
(some people's version of hell). On each administration, the person would obtain a slightly \
different score. If the scores were plotted, they would fall into a bell-shaped distribution. \
The standard deviation of this distribution would indicate the average amount of \
measurement error, or the standard error of the measurement. \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Reliability \
\
The standard error of measurement is the standard deviation of a theoretically normal \
distribution of test scores obtained by one individual on equivalent tests. The assumption \
is that for a given test, the amount of measurement error would be consistent across all \
persons. To calculate the standard error of measurement for a particular person on a \
particular test, it is not necessary to create a theoretical distribution of the person's scores; \
instead, the formula for the standard error of measurement can be used. \
\
The formula for the standard error of measurement is as follows: \
\
Smeas = SDav1-Fax \
\
EXAMPLE: The WAIS-IV has a standard deviation of 15. Assuming that the reliability \
is .84, what is the standard error of measurement? \
\
Smeas = SDaV1-Fax \
\
Smeas=15V1 -. 84 \
\
Smas =15v.16 \
\
Smeas = 15x.4 \
\
Smeas = 6.0 This indicates that the average amount of measurement error is 6.0 points. \
\
The range of the standard error of the measurement is from a minimum value of 0.0 to a \
maximum value of the standard deviation of the test (SD2). When a test is perfectly reliable, \
the standard error of measurement is 0.0, or in other words, there is no measurement error. \
When a test is totally unreliable, the standard error of measurement would be equal to the \
standard deviation of the test. \
\
Because of error in measurement, a subject's score on a test can never be reported as the \
true score. Rather, scores are reported using confidence bands or confidence intervals. To \
calculate confidence bands, a bell-shaped distribution must be created. The subject's \
obtained score is plotted in the middle of the distribution, and the standard error of \
measurement is added and subtracted to the obtained score, and then used to label the \
\
PSYCHPREP       Copyright & 2019 Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 6/Test Construction/50 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Reliability \
\
values at the z-scores (from -3 to +3). Scores are reported in terms of three possible \
confidence intervals: 68% (between -1 and +1), 95% (between -2 and +2), and 99% \
(between -3 and +3). \
\
          -3   -2   -1   0   +1   +2   +3 \
          102 108 114   120 126   132 138 \
\
EXAMPLE: Consider someone who scored 120 on the WAIS-III. In addition to the \
person's score, we would also need to know the standard error of measurement, which was \
calculated to be 6 in the above example. We can conclude that we are 68% confident that \
the person's true score is somewhere between 114 and 126, 95% confident that the true \
score is between 108 and 132, and 99% confident that the true score is between 102 and \
138. \
\
Or, assuming a person's score is 120 and the standard error of measurement is 6, what is \
the chance that the true score is between 114 and 126? Is it one out of two, two out of three, \
three out of four, or four out of five? The answer is two out of three, since the range given \
is from -1 to +1 standard deviation, or in the 68% confidence interval. 68% is roughly equal \
to 2/3, or two out of three. \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
                    6.9 VALIDITY \
\
Validity is defined as the meaningfulness, usefulness, or accuracy of a measure. The three \
basic types of validity are content, criterion-related, and construct validity. Validity either \
tells how well a test is measuring what it is supposed to be measuring (typically content or \
construct validity), or it can tell us how well a test can be used to infer criterion performance \
(criterion-related validity). \
\
In contrast with content, criterion-related, and construct validity, which are objectively \
determined, face validity refers to the degree to which a test subjectively (at face value) \
appears to measure that which it purports to measure. \
\
I. CONTENT VALIDITY \
\
Content validity addresses how adequately a test samples a particular content area, such as \
statistics, spelling, or secretarial skills. Content validity is quantified by asking a panel of \
experts if each item is essential, useful/not essential, or not necessary, yet no numerical \
validity coefficient is derived. Content validity applies to tests that require knowledge of a \
particular content domain, and generally involves looking at data like course objectives \
and job criteria. For employment tests to be content valid, they must include a \
representative sample of job-related skills. \
\
II. CRITERION-RELATED VALIDITY \
\
Criterion-related validity addresses how adequately a test score can be used to infer, \
predict, or estimate criterion outcome (e.g .. how well do SAT scores predict college GPA). \
Criterion-related validity is calculated by using a Pearson r to correlate the test scores (also \
known as predictor scores) with criterion scores (also known as outcome scores). The test \
scores are symbolized as 'x', and the outcome scores are symbolized as 'y.' The criterion- \
related validity coefficient (Ixy) ranges from -1.0 to +1.0, with validities as low as .20 \
frequently considered acceptable. The higher the coefficient (either positive or negative), \
the more valid the predictor. A negative validity coefficient indicates an inverse \
relationship between the predictor and the criterion. For example, if a test of rudeness is \
used as a predictor, and monthly sales is the criterion, these two variables would likely \
have an inverse relationship (e.g., the ruder someone is, the lower monthly sales would be). \
\
\
\
                                      Section - Test Construction: Validity \
\
When there is a reasonable correlation between the predictor and the criterion (Tsy), a \
regression equation can be constructed by computer. With such an equation, a given test \
score can be used to predict the person's criterion score. To determine how much of the \
outcome (criterion variability) can be accounted for or explained by the predictor, the \
criterion-related validity coefficient must be squared. \
\
EXAMPLE: It is found that scores on a practice test have a .50 correlation with scores on \
the EPPP. If this correlation is squared, the result is .25, which means that 25% of the \
variability in the actual exam score (criterion) is accounted for by performance on the \
practice test (predictor). This also means that 75% of the variability of the actual exam \
score is accounted for by other factors. \
\
Two subtypes of criterion-related validity exist: concurrent and predictive validity. \
\
>CONCURRENT VALIDITY In concurrent validity, the predictor and criterion are \
measured and correlated at about the same time. For example, a practice test and the EPPP \
are administered to a group of examinees within a few days or weeks, and the scores are \
correlated. \
\
>PREDICTIVE VALIDITY In predictive validity, there is a delay between the \
measurement of the predictor and the criterion. For example, SAT scores are used to predict \
college GPA, but the SATs are administered four or more years before college GPA can \
be calculated. \
\
A. STANDARD ERROR OF ESTIMATE \
\
If a predictor test has perfect criterion-related validity, the test would accurately and \
precisely predict criterion performance. However, since no test is perfectly valid, there is \
always some error in estimating a person's criterion score based on a test score. \
\
To get some idea of the average amount of error in estimating each person's criterion score, \
a theoretical distribution can be constructed. This distribution would consist of one \
person's criterion scores if he or she were measured hundreds of times on the criterion. \
(This process parallels what is done with the standard error of the mean and the standard \
error of measurement.) The spread, or variability, in this distribution is the average amount \
of error in estimating. It is known as the standard error of estimate. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
The standard error of estimate is the standard deviation of a theoretically normal \
distribution of criterion scores obtained by one person measured repeatedly. The \
assumption is that the amount of error in estimating would be consistent across all persons. \
\
The formula for the standard error of estimate is as follows: \
\
Sest = SDy -Fxy2 \
\
EXAMPLE: When criterion-related validity is .6 and the standard deviation of the \
criterion is 5, what is the standard error of estimate? \
\
Sest = SDy\\1 -T'sy2 \
\
Sest = 501 -. 62 \
\
Sest = 5.1 -. 36 \
\
Sest =50.64 \
\
Sest = 5x.8 \
\
Sest = 4.0 This indicates that the average amount of error in estimating is 4.0 points. \
\
The range of the standard error of estimate is from a minimum value of 0.0 to a maximum \
value of the standard deviation of the criterion (SD3). When a test is a perfect predictor, the \
standard error of estimate is 0.0, or in other words, the test has no error in prediction. When \
a test has no ability to predict, the maximum value for the standard error of estimate is \
equal to the standard deviation of the criterion. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
B. APPLICATIONS OF THE CRITERION-RELATED VALIDITY \
COEFFICIENT \
\
The criterion-related validity coefficient is relevant for purposes of prediction. Three \
applications involving prediction include expectancy tables, Taylor-Russell tables, and \
decision-making theory. \
\
>EXPECTANCY TABLES Expectancy tables list the probability that a person's criterion \
score will fall in a specified range based on the range in which that person's predictor score \
fell. Probabilities are expressed in terms of percentages or proportions. To create an \
expectancy table, one needs to collect a large amount of data on people for whom both \
predictor scores and criterion outcome scores are currently available. For example, if a \
group of 1.000 salespeople is given a test of sales potential (scores range from 0 - 30), and \
monthly sales in dollars are known, the following expectancy table might be generated. \
\
                   Criterion Outcome \
\
                       $0-    $2001 - $4001 - $6001 - \
                       $2000 $4000   $6000   $8000 \
       Predictor 0-10 .70     20      08     .02 \
       Scores   11-20 .30     40      20     .10 \
                21-30 .05     .15     40     40 \
\
>TAYLOR-RUSSELL TABLES Taylor-Russell tables numerically describe the amount \
of improvement that occurs in selection decisions when a predictor test is introduced. In \
other words, they show how much more accurate selection decisions are when using a \
particular predictor test as opposed to using no predictor test. \
\
     BASE RATE Base rate is defined as the rate of selecting successful employees \
     without using a predictor test. In other words, the base rate is the proportion of \
     current employees that are successful out of the total number of employees. For \
     example, without using a predictor test, a company may rate 40% of its employees \
     as successful. The base rate is therefore .40. \
\
     SELECTION RATIO The selection ratio is the proportion of available openings \
     to available applicants. For example, if there are 3 openings and 10 applicants, the \
     selection ratio is 30% or .30. \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
     INCREMENTAL VALIDITY     Incremental validity is the amount of \
     improvement in success rate that results from using a predictor test. For example. \
     if using a predictor test for hiring decisions improves the proportion of successful \
     employees from .40 (the base rate) to .65, the incremental validity is calculated as \
     25% or .25 (i.e., .65 minus .40 equals .25). \
\
     The three variables that affect incremental validity include the criterion-related \
     validity coefficient of the predictor test, the company's base rate, and the selection \
     ratio. Incremental validity is optimized when the base rate is moderate (about .5) \
     and the selection ratio is low (close to .1). \
\
>DECISION-MAKING THEORY   Decision-making theory takes the predictions of \
performance that were based on the predictor tests and compares them with the actual \
criterion outcome. For example, a cutoff is typically set on screening tests for applicants. \
Applicants who score above the predictor cutoff are classified as positive \
(passing/successful), while those who score below the predictor cutoff are classified as \
negative (failing/unsuccessful). These classifications are then compared to actual \
performance based on a quantifiable criterion. For example, a successful employee might \
be defined as one who generates a minimum of $5,000 of sales a month. \
\
There are four possible outcomes or categories: true positives, false positives, true \
negatives and false negatives. \
\
                        Predictor Cutoff \
                    Negatives Positives \
\
                    FALSE      TRUE \
           Criterion NEGATIVES POSITIVES      Criterion \
\
                     TRUE      FALSE          Cutoff \
                    NEGATIVES POSITIVES \
\
                           Predictor \
\
The classification of "positive" and "negative" is based on whether the person falls above \
or below the predictor cutoff. The classification of "true" and "false" is based on whether \
the decision was correct or incorrect. \
\
     TRUE POSITIVES True positive are those who are correctly identified as \
     possessing what is being measured (e.g., sales potential). True positives score above \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
     the predictor cutoff and their work performance is above the criterion cutoff as well. \
     They are correctly predicted to be successful employees. \
\
     FALSE POSITIVES False positives are those who are incorrectly identified as \
     possessing what is being measured (e.g., sales potential). While they score above \
     the predictor cutoff, their work performance is below the criterion cutoff. Although \
     they were predicted to be successful, they are not successful employees. \
\
     TRUE NEGATIVES True negatives are those who are correctly identified as not \
     possessing what is being measured (e.g., sales potential). They score below the \
     predictor cutoff and their work performance is below the criterion cutoff as well. \
     They are correctly identified as being unsuccessful employees. \
\
     FALSE NEGATIVES False negatives are those who are incorrectly identified as \
     not possessing what is being measured (e.g., sales potential). They score below the \
     predictor cutoff, but their actual work performance is above the criterion cutoff. \
     Although they were predicted to be unsuccessful, they are actually successful \
     employees. \
\
Changing the cutoffs will affect the number of people in each category. In many \
circumstances, it is only possible or desirable to change the predictor cutoff. For example, \
if a test is designed to detect pregnancy, the cutoff for the test (the predictor) may be \
changed to make the test more sensitive, but whether someone is pregnant (the criterion) \
cannot be changed. Or, a predictor test of sales potential may not be sensitive enough, in \
which case the predictor cutoff would be changed. It would not be desirable for the \
company to lower its standards and change the criterion cutoff. \
\
C. DEVELOPMENT OF A PREDICTOR TEST \
\
There are a variety of steps that are typically taken in order to develop a predictor test. \
\
>CONCEPTUALIZATION   In the first phase, conceptualization, the test developer \
decides on the test's objective, administration, and overall format (e.g., this will be a 20- \
item test designed to predict sales potential). \
\
>TEST CONSTRUCTION During the test construction stage, the developer decides on \
item format (e.g., multiple choice, T/F) and writes the items. Keep in mind that if the goal \
is ultimately to have a 20-item test, many more than 20 items will need to be developed \
(e.g., 50 or so). \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
>TEST TRYOUT During test tryout, the developer tries out all the items on the available \
sample. \
\
>ITEM ANALYSIS In the item analysis phase, each item is analyzed in a variety of ways \
with the goal of deciding which items are best and should be kept. Items are analyzed in \
terms of item difficulty, item discrimination, and item validity. Item-characteristic curves \
are also constructed. \
\
     ITEM DIFFICULTY Item difficulty, symbolized by 'p', can range in value from \
     .01 to .99. The item difficulty level is the proportion of people that got the item \
     right. For example, a 'p' of .1 means that only 10% of people got it right, and thus \
     it was a difficult item. In general, it is desirable for items to have an average \
     difficulty of .5, with a range of .3 to .8. \
\
     Because of the guessing factor, item difficulty is generally set above .5 for true- \
     false and multiple choice tests. A simple formula to use when setting item difficulty \
     is: \
\
          1.0 + probability of getting the item right by chance \
                        2 \
\
     Also note that when a predictor test is used to select a certain proportion of a sample \
     (e.g., 30%), the item difficulty is set at the corresponding value (.3). Item difficulty \
     represents ordinal data. \
\
     ITEM DISCRIMINATION Item discrimination looks at how well a particular \
     item discriminates between high scorers and low scorers. \
\
     ITEM VALIDITY Item validity is simply the correlation between item score and \
     criterion score. The higher the correlation, the more valid the item is. \
\
     THE ITEM-CHARACTERISTIC CURVE The item characteristic curve is a \
     plot of the relationship between item performance and total score. Item difficulty \
     level is defined as the 50% threshold, i.e., the score at which respondents have a \
     fifty-fifty chance of getting the given item right. The mathematical approach \
     involved in plotting and analyzing item-characteristic curves is called item response \
     theory (IRT) or latent trait theory. \
\
\
\
                                      Section - Test Construction: Validity \
\
     Item response theory is used to calculate to what extent a specific item on a test \
     correlates with an underlying construct. Put differently, item response theory looks \
     at a subject's performance on a test item as representing the degree to which the \
     subject has a latent trait. For example, correctly answering a difficult statistics \
     question would indicate a subject is high in the latent trait of "statistics ability." \
\
     One of the key advantages of IRT is that it can be used to compare a subject's \
     performance on two measures that have different types or number of items, or are \
     scored differently. IRT is also used to develop individually tailored "adaptive" tests, \
     in which an answer to one question in a domain area determines whether another \
     question in that area will be asked. Such tests end up having the fewest number of \
     items necessary to assess a subject's performance. \
\
>TEST REVISION Test revision is the final step. After item analysis, a subset of test \
items is kept, and the rest of the items are thrown out. The criterion-related validity \
coefficient for this subset is then calculated. Afterwards, the test is cross-validated: it is \
administered to a new sample in order to test out its validity on another group of people. \
Cross-validation always results in shrinkage of the criterion-related validity coefficient. \
Shrinkage occurs because of sample differences. Since the items were selected because \
they were the best for that specific original sample, they cannot possibly be as good for a \
different sample of people. \
\
D. FACTORS AFFECTING CRITERION-RELATED VALIDITY \
\
The factors that affect the criterion-related validity coefficient include the range of scores, \
the reliability of the predictor, the reliability of the predictor and the criterion, as well as \
criterion contamination. \
\
>RANGE OF SCORES The range of scores affects criterion-related validity. Validity is \
maximized by an unrestricted range of scores on both the predictor (x) and the criterion \
(y). Any restriction in range will reduce criterion-related validity. The range of scores \
obtained is related to the heterogeneity of the subjects. The more heterogeneous the \
subjects are in terms of the factor being assessed, the greater the range of scores will be. \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
>RELIABILITY OF THE PREDICTOR The reliability of the predictor test affects \
criterion-related validity. A test cannot be valid unless there is some degree of reliability. \
A reliable test, however, does not imply that there will be any validity whatsoever. In other \
words, reliability sets a ceiling on validity. Mathematically, the relationship between \
reliability and validity is expressed as: \
\
     [X] or Validity \uc0\u8804  Reliability \
\
In other words, although reliability is used to determine the ceiling for validity, validity \
can actually be higher than reliability. This concept is sometimes expressed in the \
following terms: a test's correlation with another test (i.e., validity) can be higher than a \
test's correlation with itself (i.e., reliability). \
\
EXAMPLE: When reliability is .64, what is the range of the validity coefficient? Using \
the above formula, the square root of .64 would be .8, which means that validity could be \
anywhere from 0.0 to .80. \
\
>RELIABILITY OF THE PREDICTOR AND CRITERION Neither the predictor nor \
the criterion is perfectly reliable. This imperfect reliability creates measurement error when \
the predictor and the criterion are correlated (i.e., when a criterion-related validity \
coefficient is calculated). The correlation is less than what it would have been if the \
predictor and criterion had been perfectly reliable, or put differently, validity is attenuated \
by the lack of reliability. The correction for attenuation formula calculates how much \
higher validity would be if the predictor and criterion were both perfectly reliable. \
\
>CRITERION CONTAMINATION Criterion contamination occurs with subjectively- \
scored criterion outcomes when the rater is informed of subjects' predictor scores before \
assigning them criterion ratings. For example, if a teacher knows that a student scored high \
on an IQ test, that knowledge may positively affect the teacher's perceptions of the student \
and result in the teacher assigning higher grades. Criterion contamination typically results \
in an inflated, or spuriously high, criterion-related validity coefficient. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
III. CONSTRUCT VALIDITY \
\
Construct validity looks at how adequately a new test measures a construct or trait. A \
construct is a hypothetical concept that typically cannot be measured directly, e.g., \
motivation, fear, or aggression. Evidence of construct validity can be ascertained in a \
variety of ways, the most common of which are factor analysis (see Statistics section), or \
the multi-trait, multi-method matrix. \
\
The multi-trait, multi-method matrix is a table with information about convergent and \
divergent validity, both of which are necessary for construct validity. \
\
                Aggression    Aggression (teacher Motivation \
                (test)        rating)        (test) \
 Aggression     1.00           .56           .07 \
 (test) \
 Aggression (teacher .56      1.00 \
 rating) \
 Motivation \
                .07 \
 (test) \
\
>CONVERGENT VALIDITY Convergent validity is expressed as the correlation of \
scores on the new test with other available measures of the same trait. To demonstrate \
construct validity, the correlation should be moderate to high. In this example, a new test \
of aggression is correlated with teacher ratings of aggression, yielding a moderate \
correlation coefficient of .56. \
\
Using the terminology of the multi-trait, multi-method matrix, convergent validity exists \
when there are moderate to high correlations of monotrait-heteromethod (i.e., the same trait \
is being measured by different methods). \
\
>DIVERGENT (DISCRIMINANT) VALIDITY Divergent (discriminant) validity is \
expressed as the correlation of scores on the new test with scores on another test that \
measures a different trait or construct. To demonstrate construct validity, the correlation \
should be low. In this example, the new test of aggression is correlated with a test of \
motivation, yielding a low correlation coefficient of .07. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 6 - Test Construction: Validity \
\
Using the terminology of the multi-trait, multi-method matrix, divergent (discriminant) \
validity exists when there are low correlations of heterotrait-monomethod (i.e., different \
traits are being measured by the same method). \
\
FINAL NOTE \
\
When assessing a test's validity, construct and content validity are mutually exclusive. For \
example, a test of statistics measures how well subjects have mastered the content domain \
of statistics (content validity). By contrast, a questionnaire designed to measure aggression \
does not assess how much knowledge the subjects have of the domain of aggression; rather, \
it is intended to measure the hypothetical construct of aggression (construct validity). \
\
Criterion-related validity focuses on how well the test predicts a criterion outcome, and it \
can be of interest in conjunction with either a test of content or a test of a construct. For \
example, a test of statistics (content) can be used to predict scores on the EPPP. Or. a \
questionnaire about aggression (construct) could be used to predict future encounters with \
the legal system. \
\
\
\
                                               Section 6 - Summary \
\
   SUMMARY OF KEY FORMULAS AND \
\
                        FACTS \
\
1. THE TWO Z-SCORE FORMULAS \
\
   Z-X-X [X] or X=x+/-Z(SD) \
  [ ] SD \
\
2. THE THREE STANDARD ERROR FORMULAS: Standard Error of The Mean, \
Measurement and Estimate. \
\
  Sg - SDpop \
              and Smeas = SDxv 1-Fax [ ] and Sest = SDy \
      [X] VN \
\
3. DEGREES OF FREEDOM: T-Tests, Chi-Square and One-Way ANOVAs \
\
  t-tests \
  t-test for single sample = N - 1 \
  t-test for matched/correlated samples = # pairs - 1 \
  t-test for independent samples = N - 2 \
\
  Chi Square \
  single sample chi square = (# rows - 1) \
  multiple sample chi square = (# rows - 1) (# columns - 1) \
\
  one-way ANOVA \
  df total = N - 1 \
  df between = # groups - 1 \
  df within = total df - df between \
\
\
 \
\
                                               Section 6 - Summary \
\
4. CHI SQUARE EXPECTED FREQUENCIES, FOR A PARTICULAR CELL \
\
   Sum of Row x Sum of Column \
          N [X] \
\
5. F RATIO \
\
   F = MSbg (treatment + error) \
     MSwg (error) \
\
6. COMMUNALITY (assuming orthogonal rotation) \
\
   Communality = (Factor loading 1)2 + (Factor loading 2)2 \
\
7. OTHER MISCELLANEOUS FORMULAS \
\
   SD = VVariance \
\
   Validity Reliability \
\
8. CALCULATING SHARED OR EXPLAINED VARIABILITY \
\
If they ask you to calculate shared/explained variability you need to square the correlation \
given. \
\
If they give you the shared/explained variability you need to square root the value to get \
the correlation. \
\
The above holds true with any Pearson r correlation, or with validity. The exception is as \
these values relate to reliability, where you will be asked about true score variability and \
the coefficient is interpreted directly, and vice versa (e.g., if reliability is .64, true score \
variability is 64%). \
\
\
\
                                               Section 6- Summary \
\
9. THE POTENTIAL RANGE OF VARIOUS VALUES \
\
   The Pearson r has a range from -1.0 to +1.0. \
   The reliability coefficient has a range from 0.0 to +1.0. \
   The validity coefficient has a range from -1.0 to +1.0. \
   The standard error of the measurement has a range from 0.0 to SDx. \
   The standard error of the estimate has a range from 0.0 to SDy. \
\
\
 \
\
                   \
\
SOCIAL AND                MULTICULTURAL \
\
              PSYCHOLOGY \
\
                       SECTION 7 \
\
                     PsychPrep \
                     PASS EFFICIENTLY \
\
           SECTION 7: SOCIAL AND \
     MULTICULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY \
\
            SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY \
\
A significant trend in the behavioral sciences is toward a biopsychosocial understanding of \
clinical phenomena. Theories of psychological development and functioning increasingly \
emphasize the interpersonal nature of psychological functioning, interpersonal \
interactions, and the person-environment relationship. Social psychology is concerned with \
individual behavior in social contexts, the way our thoughts, feelings and behaviors \
influence, and are influenced by, others. Broadly, key topics include attributions and \
heuristics, attitudes, theories of emotion, and interpersonal behavior. \
\
     7.1 ATTRIBUTIONS AND HEURISTICS \
\
I. ATTRIBUTION THEORIES \
\
Attribution theories focus on the causal explanations that people generate to explain why a \
particular event or outcome has occurred. \
\
>HEIDER Heider (1958), the originator of attribution theory, proposed that people make \
either dispositional or situational attributions. \
\
     DISPOSITIONAL ATTRIBUTIONS A dispositional or internal attribution \
     locates the cause of a behavior within the person. For example, a person's poor \
     performance on an exam is attributed to lack of effort in preparation. \
\
     SITUATIONAL ATTRIBUTIONS A situational or external attribution locates \
     the cause of the behavior outside the person. For example, a person's poor \
     performance on an exam is attributed to the test's unfairness. \
\
>KELLEY Harold Kelley (1967, 1973) proposed that when people make attributions, \
they consider three types of information: consistency, distinctiveness, and consensus. For \
example, a person is rude and obnoxious at work one day. In order to decide whether the \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attributions and Heuristics \
\
 person's behavior is due to internal or external factors, one would consider the consistency, \
 distinctiveness, and consensus of the specific behavior. \
\
      CONSISTENCY Consistency refers to whether the person behaves the same way \
     over time. In this scenario, one would consider whether the person is consistently \
     rude and obnoxious at work, in which case the behavior would be seen as high in \
     consistency. By contrast, if this were a one-time or infrequent occurrence, the \
      behavior would be considered low in consistency. \
\
      DISTINCTIVENESS Distinctiveness refers to whether a person's behavior is \
     unique to the specific situation or stimulus. For example, if the person is rude and \
      obnoxious only at work, the behavior is high in distinctiveness. If she or he is rude \
     and obnoxious at parties too, the behavior is low in distinctiveness. \
\
      CONSENSUS Consensus refers to whether other people in the same situation tend \
     to respond similarly. For example, if most people at work are rude and obnoxious, \
      the behavior is high in consensus. By contrast, if the person who is rude and \
      obnoxious at work is the only one behaving this way, the behavior is low in \
     consensus. \
\
 According to Kelley, people tend to make internal attributions for behaviors that are high \
 in consistency and low in distinctiveness and consensus (i.e., the person engages in the \
 behavior consistently over time in many different situations, and other people do not \
 engage in that behavior in the same situation). People tend to make external attributions \
 when the behavior is high is all three areas of consistency, distinctiveness, and consensus \
(i.e., the person engages in the behavior consistently over time but only in this specific \
situation, and other people engage in that behavior in the same situation). \
\
 >WEINER Weiner (1974) added a second dimension to the study of attributions, \
 stability. In addition to examining the internal versus external dimension on attributions, \
 he looked at whether attributions are made to stable versus unstable factors. For example, \
 an unemployed person has been unable to find work for six months. A stable internal factor \
 might be lack of ability, in that the person does not have the necessary skills for seeking \
 employment. An unstable internal factor might be lack of effort in searching for work. A \
 stable external factor might be a poor economy, in which few jobs are available. An \
 unstable external factor could be bad luck. \
\
 Attribution theory has contributed to our understanding of depression and learned \
 helplessness. Research has demonstrated that when a person attributes negative events to \
\
 \
\
                             Section 7 - Social & Midticultural: Attributions and Heuristics \
\
 internal, stable, and global causes, that person is more likely to experience depression, \
 helplessness, and hopelessness. \
\
 Research has also investigated the relationship between attributional style (e.g .. \
 optimistic versus pessimistic) and physical health and coping. Data suggest that a \
 pessimistic style is associated with more endorsement of illness, poorer health, less active \
 coping, and more problematic lifestyle patterns for both preventing and managing medical \
 problems. \
\
 Although we are accustomed to thinking of depressed persons as unrealistically \
 pessimistic, the research of Abramson and Alloy demonstrated that depressed persons are \
 sometimes more realistic in their appraisals than are persons with normal mood. \
 Specifically, non-depressed persons have unrealistically positive assessments of their \
 ability to control outcomes, a phenomenon termed "illusion of control." The researchers \
 also use the expression "sadder but wiser" to describe the tendency of depressed persons \
 to make more accurate appraisals. \
\
 II. ATTRIBUTIONAL BIASES \
\
 When they make attributions, people frequently do not have access to all the relevant \
 information. People therefore rely on causal schemas or general beliefs regarding the \
 causes of behavior, and these schemas are often erroneous. \
\
 >THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION BIAS The fundamental attribution bias or \
 error (Jones & Nisbett. 1971) refers to a bias toward attributing the behavior of others (the \
actor) to internal or dispositional causes, while underestimating the influence of situational \
 variables. One explanation for this bias relates to saliency, or what is more noticeable. \
 Dispositional factors (e.g., the welfare-cheaters depicted in the media) are frequently more \
 salient than situational factors (e.g., those factors that lead to poverty and joblessness). One \
 of the most significant problems resulting from the fundamental attribution bias is \
 "blaming the victim." \
\
>THE ACTOR-OBSERVER BIAS The actor-observer bias describes a situation in \
 which persons attribute their own actions to situational factors while minimizing the role \
 of dispositional elements, and attribute others' behavior to dispositional factors. One \
 explanation may be that we have greater self-knowledge as compared to knowledge about \
 others. Research on this bias has met with inconsistent results. \
\
 \
 \
\
                            Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attributions and Heuristics \
\
>THE SELF-SERVING (HEDONIC) BIAS The self-serving bias (Bradley, 1978) \
proposes that when we explain our own behavior, we tend to attribute our own successes \
to internal or personal factors, and our failures to external or situational factors. It is thought \
that this bias is motivated by a desire to maintain self-esteem as well as to look good to \
others. \
\
                   WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE? \
\
 FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION BIAS: An attribution about another's behavior \
 only. \
 ACTOR-OBSERVER BIAS: Attributions about one's own as well as another's \
 behavior. \
 SELF-SERVING BIAS: Attributions about one's own behavior only for success as well \
 as failure. \
\
III. HEURISTICS \
\
Heuristics are shortcuts or guidelines that people use to categorize other people, situations, \
or events. Even though heuristics serve to simplify thinking, they can often result in \
incorrect judgments. Three common heuristics include the availability heuristic, the \
representative heuristic, and the simulation heuristic. \
\
>AVAILABILITY HEURISTIC The availability heuristic proposes that people estimate \
the likelihood of a situation by how easily they can recall it. Based on the availability \
heuristic, it is easier to remember events that are witnessed frequently than those that are \
not witnessed frequently. For example, in one study, people were asked to rate common \
causes of death. The subjects incorrectly rated death by firearms as a more common cause \
of death than death from asthma, since firearm deaths receive so much more publicity. \
\
>REPRESENTATIVE HEURISTIC According to the representative heuristic, people \
make judgments about other people or events based on what they believe is a typical \
example of a particular category. For example, when people hear about rape or spousal \
abuse, they will most commonly assume that the victim is female and the perpetrator is \
male. \
\
>SIMULATION HEURISTIC The simulation heuristic suggests that people develop \
mental images of situations, and then use these mental images to make judgments about \
facts in their lives. For example, in a study, physicians were asked whether they had ever \
\
\
\
                            Section 7 - Social &: Multicultural: Attributions and Heuristics \
\
imagined contracting AIDS from their patients. Those who had imagined being infected \
by their patients actually believed themselves to be at a greater risk for contracting AIDS \
than the physicians who had not thought about it. It turned out that objective exposure to \
AIDS patients (based on actual frequency of contact with AIDS patient) had little to do \
with these physicians' perceived risk of contracting the disease. \
\
IV. KELLY'S PERSONAL CONSTRUCT THEORY \
\
George Kelly is known for describing ordinary people as scientists, who are constantly \
forming, testing, and revising hypotheses about the world around them. His Personal \
Construct Theory is based on the fundamental postulate that "a person's processes are \
psychologically channelized by the ways in which he anticipates events," meaning that we \
perceive the world according to what we expect to see. Kelly believed that our expectations \
are based on our past experiences. As our experiences change, we revise our expectations. \
He developed eleven corollaries to the fundamental postulate. Overall, his theory views \
people as active and future-oriented. Kelly developed the Repertory Grid Technique to map \
a client's conceptual model of the world (i.e., constructs) without contamination by the \
interviewer's constructs. This technique is widely used by organizational consultants. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
                   7.2 ATTITUDES \
\
An attitude is a learned predisposition to respond to a particular stimulus or situation. \
Attitudes can be formed from direct experience, for example, by eating ice cream. Attitudes \
can also be formed through indirect observation, for example, by listening to your parents \
discuss a social issue. An attitude has three components: cognitive, affective, and \
behavioral. \
\
The cognitive component consists of the thoughts and beliefs. For example, a person might \
believe that abortion is not acceptable. \
\
The affective component involves feelings. For example, the person who opposes abortion \
may feel angry or frustrated that abortion is legal. \
\
The behavioral component consists of predispositions to act in certain ways. The person \
who has negative thoughts and feelings about abortion might protest outside an abortion \
clinic. \
\
The three components of an attitude do not always correspond. In fact, the research \
suggests that there is only a weak positive relationship between thoughts and feelings, and \
subsequent behaviors (about a .15 correlation). In a classic study in the mid-1930s, LaPiere \
traveled across the U.S. with a Chinese couple, eating in restaurants and staying in hotels. \
Prejudice was fairly common at that time against Asians. However, only one restaurant \
refused to serve them. Six months after the trip, when LaPiere wrote to these same \
restaurants and asked whether the owners would serve Asians, 90% said they would not! \
One idea that has been proposed to explain the discrepancy between thoughts or feelings \
and behavior is the concept of situational constraint. For instance, perhaps the people \
who served LaPiere and the Chinese couple feared making a scene in front of other \
customers. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
I. CONSISTENCY THEORIES \
\
Consistency theories propose that attitude formation and change are organized by a need \
to impose structure and order on one's understanding of the environment. Four consistency \
models are described below, including balance theory, symmetry theory, congruity theory, \
and cognitive dissonance theory. \
\
>BALANCE THEORY Balance theory explains attitude change when two people have \
attitudes toward the same object or activity. Heider (1946) proposed that a balanced state \
exists when all the elements are positively related, or when one is positive and two are \
negative. By contrast, an unbalanced state exists when all the elements are negative, or \
when one element is negative and two are positive. When there is imbalance, the people \
involved will move toward changing their feelings. \
\
This theory becomes much easier to understand with examples. A balanced state would \
exist if two friends, Joe and Beth, both really liked a political candidate (i.e., all the \
elements were positively related), or both had very negative feelings about the candidate \
(i.e., one positive element and two negative elements). An imbalanced state would exist if \
Joe really liked the candidate and Beth strongly disliked the candidate (two positive \
elements and one negative element). An imbalanced state would also exist if Joe and Beth \
disliked each other and both disliked the candidate (three negative elements). In order to \
create more balance, Joe and Beth would either have to change their feelings toward each \
other or toward the candidate. \
\
>SYMMETRY THEORY Symmetry theory (Newcomb, 1961) extends balance theory \
by considering the intensity of the relationship. He posited that the stronger the bond \
between the two people, the more intense any imbalance (lack of symmetry) will be felt \
and the stronger the motivation will be to change attitudes. Thus, a strong friendship \
between Joe and Beth will lead to greater attitude change than a weak friendship. \
\
>CONGRUITY THEORY   Congruity theory (Osgood, 1955) further extends balance \
theory by making predictions about which attitudes will change. It posits that a person will \
favor the object toward which he or she already feels the most affinity. For example, if \
Joe's affinity for Beth is stronger than his affinity for the candidate, Joe is likely to decrease \
his support for the candidate, and thus bring the relationship into more balance. \
Alternatively, if Joe likes the candidate more than he likes Beth, he is likely to decrease his \
affinity for Beth. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
>COGNITIVE DISSONANCE   Cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957), the most \
popular of the consistency theories, proposes that people change their attitudes to reduce \
the aversive arousal they experience when they become aware of inconsistency in their \
cognitions. This inconsistency, or dissonance, frequently becomes most apparent when the \
person holds a particular attitude and has behaved as if he or she had the exact opposite \
attitude. Essentially, cognitive dissonance results in people changing their attitudes to \
match their actions. \
\
In their classic experiment, Festinger & Carlsmith (1959) recruited subjects to perform a \
dull task. After doing this for one hour, as the subject was leaving, he or she was asked to \
do the experimenter a favor and tell the incoming participant that the task was interesting. \
Subjects were paid either $1 or $20 to do so. Each subject was then asked to complete a \
questionnaire describing his or her true feelings about the task. Subjects paid $1 reported \
greater liking for the task than the subjects paid $20. While all subjects experienced \
dissonance between attitude (a boring task) and behavior (lying by saying the task was \
interesting), those paid $1 for the lie felt more discomfort and therefore changed their \
attitudes more. \
\
The research suggests four circumstances in which attitude change results from cognitive \
dissonance: postdecisional dissonance, effort justification, insufficient justification, and \
insufficient deterrence. \
\
     POSTDECISIONAL DISSONANCE Postdecisional dissonance occurs when a \
     person is faced with two good choices, and he or she becomes upset at not choosing \
     one of the alternatives. The person then emphasizes the positive features of the \
     alternative he or she did choose. \
\
     EFFORT JUSTIFICATION Effort justification occurs when a person is upset at \
    having spent significant effort on a goal that turns out not to be very worthwhile. \
     The person then emphasizes the positive qualities of the goal. \
\
     INSUFFICIENT JUSTIFICATION Insufficient justification occurs when a \
     person performs an undesirable behavior for a small inducement. The person then \
     emphasizes the positive qualities of the behavior. \
\
     INSUFFICIENT DETERRENCE Insufficient deterrence occurs when a person \
     does not perform a desirable action because of a small deterrent. He or she then \
     emphasizes the negative aspects of the action. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
II. SELF-PERCEPTION THEORY \
\
Self-perception theory (Daryl Bem) is a competing theory to the consistency theories. \
According to this theory, people infer their attitudes as well as their emotions by observing \
their own behavior. This theory has been described by the phrase, "I did it, so I believe it!" \
Self-perception theory does not require "dissonance." or some kind of aversive arousal to \
motivate attitude change. For example, if someone who favors a ballot measure gives a \
speech supporting it, that person will usually feel even more positive about the measure \
afterwards, reasoning, "If I gave a speech for it, then I really must favor it!" Cognitive \
dissonance theory would be unable to explain this attitude change. \
\
Advocates of self-perception theory reinterpret the classic Festinger & Carlsmith study. \
They argue that subjects simply observed their own behavior: those paid $20 assumed that \
they were lying for profit and those paid $1 assumed that they wouldn't be lying for such \
low payment and must have enjoyed the task. There are research studies that support both \
theories. Overall, it appears that self-perception theory is most applicable when current \
behavior is in the same direction as past behavior and cognitive dissonance theory is most \
applicable when there is a discrepancy between current and past behavior. \
\
According to self-perception theory, the person who engages in an activity for a large \
reward might conclude that he or she enjoys the activity less than the person who engages \
in the same activity for little or no external reward. The overjustification hypothesis \
extends this idea and posits that people lose interest in previously desirable activities after \
performing them for too much justification. Research has found that if an individual who \
engages in an activity out of intrinsic motivation is given external incentives, the original \
intrinsic motivation will decrease. For example, if a child who enjoys reading is given a \
reward for reading books, she will come to believe that her motivation for reading is to \
earn the reward (extrinsic factor), and not simply to engage in an activity that she finds \
pleasurable (intrinsic factor). Therefore, when she is no longer rewarded for reading, she \
is likely to read on a less frequent basis or even stop reading. \
\
III. SELF-CONCEPT \
\
A number of theories describe how people maintain or adjust their self-concepts. \
\
>SELF-VERIFICATION THEORY Developed by Swann, self-verification theory \
posits that people are motivated to confirm their self-concept, even if it is negative. For \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
example, many depressed people will actively discount positive feedback and seek out \
feedback that confirms a negative view of themselves. \
\
>BEHAVIORAL CONFIRMATION   A competing theory, behavioral confirmation, \
posits that people are motivated to confirm the expectations that others have of them. For \
example, students with varying levels of ability perform better when their teachers have \
been led to believe that these students are gifted. In this case, students seek to fulfill the \
teacher's view of them. However, there is much research that fails to support this theory \
and shows that people actively resist when others have negative expectations of them. \
\
>SELF-ENHANCEMENT THEORY According to self-enhancement theory, people are \
motivated to think favorably of themselves and behave in ways that cause others to see \
them favorably as well. \
\
Obviously, these three theories are contradictory. There is some research support for each \
of these theories in certain situations. Overall, self-verification theory seems the most \
robust, particularly when the self-concept is well established. \
\
IV. ATTITUDE CHANGE \
\
Persuasion involves efforts to alter attitudes and beliefs. The effectiveness of persuasion is \
influenced by three factors: the source of the communication, the message itself, and the \
audience. \
\
A. PERSUASION \
\
>CHARACTERISTICS OF   THE SOURCE   The relative weight of various \
characteristics of the source depends on whether the communicator is attempting to change \
attitudes on important or unimportant matters. On relatively unimportant matters (e.g., \
breakfast cereal), the source is most influential when he or she is likable, similar to the \
recipient of the communication, and physically attractive (e.g., models on TV \
commercials). On important, deeply held convictions, the most important factor is the \
credibility of the source. Credibility consists of both trustworthiness (the communicator is \
perceived as having little to gain) and expertise. While positions advocated by highly \
credible and prestigious persons are more readily adopted than those expressed by less \
reputable sources, there is a sleeper effect, which involves people forgetting the source of \
the communication over time, but remembering the message. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 7 - Social Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
Research has demonstrated a double standard for persuasion styles for men and women. \
Women who use a more tentative speech style (e.g., "I'm not an expert.") were more \
effective in persuading men. However, with a female audience, a more powerful speaking \
style was more effective. Recent research on women as persuasive communicators supports \
the idea that the most effective approach involves women combining assertive language \
with non-verbal cues that communicate friendliness and cooperation. \
\
>CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MESSAGE When it comes to characteristics of the \
message, some researchers have found that appeals to logic and reason are most persuasive, \
whereas others have found that appeals to emotions are more powerful. One common \
emotional appeal is to fear. Recent research supports the idea that for fear tactics to work, \
they must engender a lot of fear, the message must be believable, and specific instructions \
for avoiding the danger must be offered. \
\
Another factor that may affect persuasion is the order in which the message is presented. \
When there is a long gap between a speech and the desired action (e.g., voting in an \
election), the speaker who speaks first will be remembered best. This phenomenon is \
known as the primacy effect. When the gap is smaller, such as a few days, the speaker \
who speaks last is best remembered by the audience. This phenomenon is known as the \
recency effect. \
\
 HINT: \
 Long gap --- > speak first (Primacy Effect) \
 Short gap --- > speak last (Recency Effect) \
\
>CHARACTERISTICS OF THE AUDIENCE Characteristics of the audience play a \
significant role in persuasion. Research has found that people with moderate self-esteem, \
who have a moderate discrepancy in attitude, higher vulnerability (e.g., young children and \
teens, depressed adults), and a higher level of involvement with the idea or product, are the \
easiest to influence. One study (Hovland) noted that it is most effective to present both \
sides of the argument when the listener is initially opposed, well informed, and intelligent. \
In contrast, presenting one side works better when the listener initially favors the argument, \
is poorly informed, and not intelligent. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 7 - Social Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
B. REACTANCE THEORY \
\
According to reactance theory, people will not comply with requests or attempts to be \
persuaded if they feel their freedom is threatened. People feel anxious and distressed when \
freedom appears threatened, and they regain a sense of control by refusing to comply. \
Coercion, such as threats or a "hard sell," typically triggers a reactance motivational state. \
The stronger the coercion is, the stronger the reactance is, making the person more resistant \
to persuasion or compliance. \
\
C. THE ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD MODEL OF PERSUASION \
\
The elaboration likelihood model proposes that there are two ways in which people are \
persuaded, through either the peripheral route or through the central route. \
\
>PERIPHERAL ROUTE The peripheral route to persuasion involves a focus on aspects \
that are not central to the message, but rather are peripheral to it. For example, people are \
influenced by such elements as the attractiveness of the speaker, the speaker's expertise, \
or the speaker's similarity to the listener, rather than by the message itself. The peripheral \
route commonly relies on heuristics such as "beautiful people don't lie." \
\
>CENTRAL ROUTE   The central route to attitude change involves thinking about \
whatever relevant information is available, and elaborating on the message's arguments. \
Taking the central route requires both the ability to process the message, and the motivation \
or willingness to think deeply about ideas. Central attitude change is relatively enduring. \
resists further change, and predicts behavior. \
\
D. INOCULATION \
\
Inoculation is a technique to increase resistance to persuasion. In inoculation, a person is \
given a mild argument against a belief, and then practices refuting this mild argument. This \
approach improves the person's ability to refute stronger arguments against the belief. This \
technique works along the same lines as vaccines which are sometimes termed \
"inoculations;" a weak version of a virus is administered to a person in the form of a \
vaccine so that antibodies may be developed. Then, if the person is later exposed to the \
virus, antibodies will be in place to successfully fight it off. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
V. CONFLICT \
\
Conflicts arise when people are forced to make a choice between at least two incompatible \
alternatives. The three basic types of conflict include the approach-approach conflict, the \
approach-avoidance conflict, and the avoidance-avoidance conflict. \
\
>APPROACH-APPROACH CONFLICT In the approach-approach conflict, a person \
must choose between two or more favorable alternatives. For example, a person must \
decide which of two new cars she will purchase. Thus, no matter what choice is made, the \
result will be desirable. The major source of stress in this conflict comes from wanting it \
all, but not being able to have it all. Generally, as soon as the person moves toward one \
alternative, the other decreases in its appeal to the individual. \
\
>APPROACH-AVOIDANCE CONFLICT In an approach-avoidance conflict, a person \
must choose whether to do one thing that will have both desirable and undesirable results. \
For example, a couple is deciding whether or not to have a child, and knows that the child \
will enrich their lives but will also take away free time. This conflict leads to a great deal \
of ambivalence because the result of any alternative chosen is both good and bad. \
Generally, the approach tendency is greatest initially, and then, as one approaches the goal. \
avoidance tendencies become stronger. \
\
>AVOIDANCE-AVOIDANCE CONFLICT In the avoidance-avoidance conflict, the \
person has to choose between two unpleasant alternatives that will lead to negative results \
no matter which choice is made. For example, in the movie "Sophie's Choice," a German \
soldier demanded that Sophie give up either her son or daughter. The avoidance-avoidance \
conflict is usually the most difficult to resolve and generates the most stress. Typically, \
there is significant vacillation, and the person ends up choosing "the lesser of two evils." \
Alternatively, he or she can sometimes opt to not choose, or escape the field altogether. \
\
VI. PREJUDICE AND DISCRIMINATION \
\
Prejudice is a generally negative attitude directed toward specific people, solely because \
of their membership in an identified group. Prejudice is composed of three elements: \
cognitive, affective, and behavioral. \
\
>COGNITIVE The cognitive component (e.g., stereotype) consists of negative thoughts \
and beliefs. \
\
\
 \
\
                                    Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Attitudes \
\
>AFFECTIVE The affective component consists of feelings and emotions towards the \
objects of prejudice. \
\
>BEHAVIORAL The behavioral component consists of predispositions to act in certain \
ways (e.g., discrimination). \
\
A. SOURCES OF PREJUDICE \
\
A variety of sources of prejudice and discrimination are thought to exist. These include \
learning, cognitive processes, personality traits, economic and political competition, and \
displaced aggression. \
\
>LEARNED PREJUDICE People can learn prejudices in the same way they learn other \
attitudes, through classical and operant conditioning, and social learning. \
\
Research on sex stereotypes has found that males are seen as more competent than females \
by both males and females. When asked to rate a prose passage purportedly written by a \
male versus a female, both males and females consistently rated the male's passage as better \
written. Another study looked at attributions given to men and women for success on \
traditionally masculine versus traditionally feminine tasks. The success of males was \
universally attributed to ability regardless of type of task, while the success of females was \
attributed to ability only on the traditionally female task, and to luck on the traditionally \
male task. \
\
>COGNITIVE PROCESSES People frequently attempt to make sense of the complex \
social world by creating ingroups and outgroups. Ingroups are categories in which people \
see themselves as members, while outgroups consist of all others. People tend to see \
ingroup members as more attractive, possessing more desirable personality attributes, and \
as behaving in more socially acceptable ways. This is referred to as ingroup favoritism and \
outgroup negativity. Another cognitive bias, the outgroup homogeneity effect, is the \
tendency to see more diversity among members of one's ingroup and less among the \
outgroup. This tendency is reflected in statements such as, "They all look alike to me." \
\
>PERSONALITY TRAITS The most salient personality trait associated with prejudice \
is authoritarianism. According to Adorno, people who score high on his F scale are highly \
authoritarian, and are likely to have been raised by domineering fathers and punitive \
mothers. As they grow up, they displace their anger and hatred toward their parents onto \
anyone deviant, disobedient, or who is a member of a minority ethnic group. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 7 - Social Multicultural: \
\
>COMPETITION FOR LIMITED RESOURCES Some research has supported the \
idea that prejudice develops out of competition for limited resources, and is then \
maintained because it results in economic and political advantages to the dominant group. \
In the U.S., lower-class Whites hold more racist attitudes than higher-class Whites. perhaps \
because the upper class is not threatened by minority competition, while lower-class \
Whites might be. \
\
>DISPLACED AGGRESSION A final idea is that prejudice comes out of displaced \
aggression. When the source of frustration is either bigger or capable of retaliating, or when \
the cause of frustration is ambiguous, people displace aggression, or scapegoat, innocent \
victims. \
\
B. REDUCING PREJUDICE AND DISCRIMINATION \
\
Research shows that the best ways to combat prejudice is to encourage cooperation rather \
than competition. In Sherif's (1966) Robber's Cave study, researchers created strong \
feelings of ingroup and outgroup identification in a group of 11 and 12 year old boys at a \
summer camp. After using competition to create prejudice and hatred between two rival \
groups, the researchers demonstrated how cooperation could successfully eliminate it. The \
experimenters created tasks that required expertise, labor, and cooperation from both \
groups, where prizes were given to all for successful completion. \
\
Sherif's study showed the importance of cooperation rather than competition, and \
especially the importance of superordinate goals in reducing prejudice. Superordinate \
goals are higher than individual goals, and are goals that can only be achieved with both \
groups working together, and are of benefit to both parties. \
\
Other researchers have found that sometimes increasing contact between two groups can \
reduce hostility. This is most likely to happen when, in the process, negative stereotypes \
can be disconfirmed. \
\
The best outcome measure of successful intergroup relations, in programs such as school \
integration, is actual measures of behavioral interaction (e.g., kids playing together on the \
playground). \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 7 - Social & Midticultural: Theories of Emotion \
\
           7.3 THEORIES OF EMOTION \
\
Three well-known theories of emotion are the James-Lange theory, the Cannon-Bard \
 theory, and Schacter's two-factor theory. \
\
>JAMES-LANGE THEORY According to the James-Lange theory, emotions result \
 from perceiving bodily reactions or responses. For example, an individual is presented with \
a stimulus (e.g., sees a mugger) and the body automatically reacts (e.g., heart rate increases, \
the person begins to run). The individual perceives the bodily reactions and interprets these \
as the emotion of fear. In other words, this theory proposes "I'm running and my heart is \
pounding, so I must be afraid." Overall, research has not supported this theory. \
Physiological arousal commonly occurs in the absence of emotion (e.g., during physical \
exercise). In addition, individuals are not able to perceive the subtle differences in \
physiological arousal that occurs during various emotional states (e.g., fear versus \
excitement). \
\
>CANNON-BARD THEORY The Cannon-Bard theory proposes that emotions and \
bodily reactions occur at the same time. When an individual perceives an event (e.g., sees \
a mugger), messages are sent simultaneously to the hypothalamus (responsible for \
physiologically arousing the body) and to the amygdala (causing the subjective experience \
of fear). Accordingly, bodily reactions are not necessary in order to experience feelings. \
Some support for this theory comes from research that has demonstrated that animals that \
have been surgically prevented from experiencing physiological arousal nevertheless \
display emotional behavior (e.g., growling). \
\
>SCHACTER'S TWO-FACTOR THEORY Schacter's two-factor theory posits that \
 emotion results from information from two systems: internal (e.g., hypothalamus and \
amygdala) and external (e.g., context). Specifically, this theory contends that the \
 experience of emotion is a function of both physiological arousal and cognitive labeling. \
In essence, an individual experiences physical arousal and then looks to the environment \
(external cues) for help labeling the emotion. For example a racing heart (arousal) at the \
 opening of the Olympics (external cues) may be labeled "excitement" whereas the same \
heart racing at the start of the licensing exam may be labeled "anxiety." \
\
This theory received support from Schacter and Singer's (1962) epinephrine studies. \
Subjects were injected with epinephrine and as a result, experienced physical arousal. \
\
 \
\
                               Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Theories of Emotion \
\
Subjects who had been accurately informed about the effects of epinephrine simply \
reported that they were physiologically aroused. In contrast, subjects who had not been \
informed about the effects of epinephrine (i.e., they did not have the appropriate cognitive \
label) looked to environmental cues to interpret how they felt. Subjects who were placed \
with confederates who acted happy reported themselves to be happy, and subjects placed \
with confederates who acted unhappy reported themselves to be unhappy. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
         7.4 INTERPERSONAL BEHAVIOR \
\
I. PERSON PERCEPTION AND IMPRESSION \
 FORMATION \
\
Person perception, or social perception, refers to the process of forming impressions of \
others. Person perception is thought to be influenced by both affective and cognitive \
 elements. \
\
In forming initial impressions of social and intellectual qualities of others, people typically \
make evaluative assessments based on either positive or negative affective reactions. These \
judgments may be distorted by perceptual biases (e.g., halo effect, primacy effect). For \
example, research has indicated that when forming impressions of others, one tends to view \
another person more favorably if the person first appears competent, and then fails or \
makes mistakes, as compared with a person who fails at a task first and then succeeds. This \
 is presumably because people tend to hold on to information that is presented first. \
\
Person perception is also influenced by cognitive components, because individuals actively \
attempt to develop coherent and meaningful impressions of others. Typically, people create \
social schemas or organized ideas about people, which influence person perception. Social \
schemas are heavily influenced by social context. The impact of social context on person \
 perception was demonstrated in Rosenhan's (1973) study, where seven "normal" people \
 called for appointments at various hospitals, and on arrival complained of hearing voices \
that said "empty," "hollow," and "thud." Other than this single complaint and giving false \
names and occupations, each gave truthful information to the interviewer and acted \
normally. All were admitted to the various hospitals, and all but one were diagnosed with \
schizophrenia. Once inside the hospital, the "pseudopatients" acted normally and never \
mentioned hearing voices. Nevertheless, the hospital staff continued to think of them as \
patients and treated them as such. The average length of stay was 19 days! \
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
II. SOCIAL COMPARISON \
\
Social comparison theory states that especially when no objective standards exist, people \
tend to compare themselves to others in order to evaluate their own behavior, attributes, \
and abilities. Depending on the circumstance, people compare themselves to others who \
they perceive as quite similar, a little better, or a little worse (e.g., in attributes such as \
attractiveness, wealth, intelligence, success). \
\
Upward comparisons, in which a person compares him or herself to persons who are \
slightly superior, can raise self-esteem by suggesting that improvement is possible. Yet \
upward comparisons can also lower self-esteem by suggesting that the person is not \
performing adequately. \
\
Downward comparisons, in which a person compares him or herself to people who are \
slightly worse, can raise self-esteem by suggesting the person is doing well, or can lower \
self-esteem by reminding the person that his or her own performance could easily \
deteriorate. \
\
III. ATTRACTION \
\
Social psychologists have found several significant factors in interpersonal attraction. \
These include physical attractiveness, proximity, similarity, and reciprocity. \
\
>PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS   Research has consistently shown that physical \
attractiveness is one of the most important factors in our initial liking or loving of others. \
As early as six months of age, infants will spend more time looking at photographs of \
attractive rather than unattractive people. In preschool, beautiful children are more popular \
and rated as more intelligent and well-adjusted by their teachers. As adults, attractive \
individuals are seen by both sexes as more interesting, intelligent, independent, and \
sexually warm. People prefer physically attractive partners, but the matching hypothesis \
posits that people of approximately equal physical attractiveness are likely to select each \
 other. \
\
>PROXIMITY Proximity, physical nearness, or propinquity is another major factor in \
attraction. Proximity appears to promote attraction largely because of mere exposure. \
Familiarity appears to strongly enhance attractiveness and overall liking. \
\
>SIMILARITY The major cementing factor for a long-term relationship is similarity. \
The similarity hypothesis proposes that people similar in social background and values \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
(e.g., age, race, religion, social class, education, etc.) tend to form intimate relationships. \
However, the idea that opposites attract is supported as well, in that people frequently \
choose partners who are different in terms of personality. This tendency is termed need \
complementarity. \
\
 >RECIPROCITY HYPOTHESIS The reciprocity hypothesis suggests that people tend \
to like others who like them. \
\
Social exchange theory looks at how attraction is affected by the costs and benefits of \
being in a relationship. According to social exchange theory, people are concerned with \
the benefits and liabilities of a relationship. Each person considers the rewards from the \
interaction, as well as the costs incurred in the interaction. When costs outweigh rewards. \
attraction declines. Additionally, the person choosing a partner is most likely to select \
someone with the most favorable reward to cost ratio as compared with other available \
 partners. \
\
Research also suggests that arousal heightens attraction. Schacter (1959) conducted an \
 experiment in which people were led to believe that they were about to receive either \
painful or non-painful shock. Those who believed that they would receive painful shock \
became anxious, and they chose to affiliate with one another. Based on this research, he \
concluded it is not simply that misery loves company, rather, that misery loves miserable \
company. \
\
IV. BYSTANDER APATHY \
\
 Bystander apathy refers to the phenomenon of individuals failing to help a victim when \
other bystanders are present. Bystander apathy most likely results from diffusion of \
 responsibility, the tendency to assume that someone else will respond and take action. \
Overall, a person is most likely to receive help when there is only one bystander; the \
 likelihood of receiving help actually decreases as the number of bystanders increases. The \
people who are most likely to stop and help are those who have useful skills (e.g., doctors), \
or those who have experienced something similar to what they are witnessing (e.g., they \
have been mugged in the past or have been in a car accident). \
\
\
\
                              Section 7 - Social Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
V. AGGRESSION \
\
Aggression is any form of behavior directed toward harming or injuring another living \
being. Theories that attempt to explain aggression have focused on internal as well as \
external explanations for aggression. Internal factors include instinct and biology. External \
factors include frustration, social learning, group influence, and crowding. \
\
>INSTINCTS In terms of the contribution of instinct, Freud proposed that aggressive \
impulses are inborn and instinctive. Ethologists also believe that aggression is instinctual \
and that it evolved because it contributes to survival of the fittest. Ethologists believe \
aggression prevents overcrowding and allows the strongest animals to win mates and \
reproduce the species. Most social psychologists reject both of these instinctual theories. \
\
>BIOLOGICAL THEORIES One focus on the biological theories of aggression has \
been on the study of the brain and nervous system. This research has supported the \
existence of "aggression centers" in the brain (especially the hypothalamus, amygdala, and \
other parts of the limbic system). A second line of biological research has focused on the \
role of hormones, especially testosterone, in aggressive behavior. \
\
>FRUSTRATION-AGGRESSION HYPOTHESIS    One of the most well-known \
theories of aggression is the frustration-aggression hypothesis proposed by Dollard (1939), \
according to which aggression is always due to frustration, and frustration always leads to \
some form of aggression. Experimental tests of this hypothesis have produced conflicting \
results. \
\
>SOCIAL LEARNING THEORY    Social learning theorists believe we learn to be \
aggressive by observing models behaving aggressively and by seeing others rewarded for \
aggressive behavior. Considerable evidence does exist that the media can contribute to \
aggression. Cross-cultural research among children in five countries found that TV \
violence did increase aggressiveness, and that aggressive children do tend to seek out \
violent programs. Several studies found that when TV is introduced to new areas of the \
world, there is an abrupt and dramatic increase in homicide rates. \
\
>GROUP MEMBERSHIP Group membership strongly influences all our behaviors, \
including aggression. Deindividuation is one form of group influence on aggression. Group \
roles (e.g., prison guard) can also influence aggression. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social &: Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
>CROWDING Another factor that may affect aggression is crowding. Crowding tends \
to affect men more than women and leads to a heightened sense of arousal for both positive \
and negative emotions. \
\
VI. SOCIAL INFLUENCE \
\
Social influence refers to the influence that people have upon the beliefs or behaviors of \
others. Two widely researched areas of social influence are conformity and obedience. \
\
A. CONFORMITY \
\
Conformity involves changing one's behavior as a result of real or imagined social or group \
pressure. Two well-known studies on conformity are those of Sherif (1935) and Asch \
(1951). \
\
Sherif (1935) studied the autokinetic effect, which is the tendency for people to perceive \
a stationary point of light to be moving in a darkened room. Sherif found that the \
individual's judgment depended on the group's judgment. Subjects initially tested alone \
changed their judgments the second time around to conform to the group norm. \
\
Asch (1951) studied subjects' responses to a simple task in which subjects were shown a \
card containing three lines (A, B, and C), and were asked to select the line closest in length \
to a fourth line (X). When subjects were placed in a group with six experimental \
confederates who responded incorrectly before the subject, one-third of subjects conformed \
and agreed with the group's obviously incorrect choice. In further studies, Asch found that \
group size and unanimity were major influencing factors. Conformity peaked when groups \
included 7 people that were unanimous. \
\
It appears that in general three factors affect conformity. These include normative social \
influence, informational social influence, and reference groups. \
\
>NORMATIVE SOCIAL INFLUENCE Normative social influence refers to pressure \
to conform based on a need for approval and acceptance by the group. For example, a \
person's choice of clothing is influenced by the type of clothes his friends wear. \
\
Associated with normative social influence are the informal norms of a particular group. \
People's behaviors are highly influenced by the informal norms of the small groups of which \
\
\
\
                             Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
they are members. For example, research has shown that teenagers are more affected by \
their peers' sexual behavior than by information on HIV prevention. \
\
>INFORMATIONAL SOCIAL INFLUENCE Informational social influence refers to \
pressure to conform based on the assumption that the other person has more information \
than you. For example, a person buys a certain brand of ski equipment because a friend, \
who is an avid skier, recommended it. \
\
>REFERENCE GROUPS Reference groups refer to people we admire, like, and want \
to resemble, which can include athletes, movie stars, parents, teachers, supervisors, friends, \
etc. For example, a person is influenced to buy Wheaties because of the endorsement of a \
famous athlete. \
\
While much of the research on conformity has focused on majority group influence, there \
has also been research looking at the impact of a person holding a minority opinion within \
the group. (Note that this research concerns someone with a minority opinion, not an ethnic \
minority individual in a group of individuals from the majority culture.) The likelihood of \
this person influencing the group is enhanced when the person with the minority viewpoint \
persists in expressing his or her position, is firm yet flexible, and is logically consistent and \
coherent. Additional factors influencing persuasiveness include the degree to which the \
position is consistent with the predominant social culture of the group, and the extent to \
which the individual agrees with the majority view regarding most other group issues. \
\
Another concept associated with conformity is idiosyncrasy credits. Idiosyncrasy credits \
can be earned by initially conforming to the group's norms. If a person has earned \
idiosyncrasy credits, the group is more tolerant when she or he later deviates from certain \
group norms. In other words, a group will allow a member to deviate from the established \
norms if she or he has previously complied with group norms. \
\
B. OBEDIENCE \
\
A second form of social influence, obedience, involves following a direct command. \
usually from someone in authority. The classic studies on obedience were those of Milgram \
(1963, 1974). In Milgram's studies, subjects were brought into a laboratory, ostensibly to \
study the effects of punishment on learning. Subjects were instructed to provide shocks to \
another subject (actually a confederate) when the latter gave a wrong response or no \
response. The shock meter was labeled from "slight shock" to "DANGER: Severe Shock," \
and up to XXX (450 volts). Although no shock was actually administered, confederates" \
responses ranged from uttering sounds of pain, pounding on the walls, pleas to stop, and \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
deathly silence. A total of 65% of the subjects obeyed the commands of the experimenter \
and administered the most severe levels of shock. \
\
The key factors that appear to play a role in obedience include the power of persons in \
positions of authority, placement of responsibility (in Milgram's experiment subjects were \
assured early on that the experimenter was responsible for the well-being of the learner), \
and gradualism. In Milgram's experiment, the levels of shock were gradually increased. It \
has been proposed that the initial mild levels of shocks may have worked as a foot-in-the \
door technique, whereby once a participant complied with the initial request, he or she \
may have felt trapped by his or her behavior and the nature of the situation. A key factor \
that has been shown to reduce obedience is witnessing a disobedient model. \
\
VII. GROUPS \
\
A group consists of two or more people who have some mutually recognized relationship \
with one another. Being a part of a group can significantly influence behavior, decision- \
making, and task performance. The three basic types of group tasks are classified as \
additive, disjunctive, and conjunctive. \
\
>ADDITIVE TASKS An additive task is one in which group members' separate \
performances are added to produce a combined effect. For example, a group of scientists \
and engineers combine their talents to construct a space shuttle. \
\
>DISJUNCTIVE TASKS A disjunctive task is one in which the outcome is affected by \
the performance of the most effective group member. For example, a group meets to decide \
how to improve the company's marketing strategy, and one person comes up with an \
outstanding idea. \
\
>CONJUNCTIVE TASKS    A conjunctive task is one in which the group's \
accomplishment is limited by the performance of the least effective member. For example, \
one member of a team that oversees quality control sleeps during his shift, resulting in \
significant product errors. \
\
A. GROUP INFLUENCE ON BEHAVIOR \
\
Behavior can be significantly affected by the roles played in a group. In the now classic \
Stanford University prison study by Zimbardo (1978), 20 well-adjusted young college men \
were paid $15 a day to participate in a simulation of prison life and were randomly assigned \
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
to be either prisoner or guard. While planned to last two weeks, the study was stopped after \
six days because of alarming psychological changes in the participants. The guards were \
 seriously abusing their power and the traumatized prisoners were becoming more and more \
depressed. According to interviews conducted after the study, the students became so \
absorbed in their roles that they forgot they were volunteers in a university experiment. \
\
Groups can also exert a powerful influence by inducing feelings of anonymity. \
 Deindividuation refers to the process of suspending one's private self-identity and \
adopting instead the identity of the group. It involves both decreased self-awareness and \
 decreased self-regulation. Zimbardo (1970) created conditions of anonymity by having \
 NYU female students wear identical white coats and hoods resembling members of the Ku \
 Klux Klan. When given the opportunity to administer shocks to other female volunteers \
 (actually confederates), the women in costume gave twice the amount of shock as the \
 women who were not in costume and wore large name tags. Zimbardo's experiment \
demonstrated that the critical factor in deindividuation is anonymity, not just group \
membership. \
\
 B. DECISION-MAKING IN GROUPS \
\
Group decision-making has been described as being influenced by three phenomena: risky \
shift, group polarization, and groupthink. \
\
 >RISKY SHIFT Risky shift describes the tendency for people in groups to make riskier \
decisions than they would if they were deciding as individuals. For example, people \
making business investments individually are more cautious than people who pool their \
monies and make business investments as a group. Because of tendencies to make riskier \
decisions, groups can be more creative and innovative than individuals working alone. \
\
>RESPONSE POLARIZATION     Response polarization, also known as group \
polarization, describes the tendency for people in groups to become more extreme in their \
 views. For example, someone opposed to abortion who joins a group of like-minded \
individuals will be likely to end up more strongly opposed to abortion. \
\
>GROUPTHINK Groupthink occurs in highly cohesive groups when group members \
seek concurrence, consensus, and unanimity more than they seek the best possible \
alternative. When groupthink occurs, there is a tendency for group members to think alike \
and lose their critical evaluative capacities due to social pressures to conform. A significant \
historical example comes from the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. Prior to the \
attack, the commander-in-chief of the U.S. Pacific Fleet met with his high-level staff \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Interpersonal Behavior \
\
members at headquarters in Hawaii to discuss whether they should prepare for possible \
attack by Japan. The admiral and his advisors, who shared similar backgrounds and \
perspectives, discounted many warnings of imminent attack and continued with business \
as usual. Thus, they were completely unprepared for the devastating attack on Pearl Harbor. \
\
 C. TASK PERFORMANCE \
\
Research on the effects of groups on task behavior has found mixed results. Three \
phenomena have been described, including social facilitation, social inhibition, and social \
loafing. \
\
>SOCIAL FACILITATION Social facilitation occurs when individual task performance \
is enhanced by the mere presence of others. Social facilitation occurs most frequently when \
the task is simple or familiar. \
\
 >SOCIAL INHIBITION Social inhibition occurs when task performance is \
compromised by the presence of others. Social inhibition occurs when the task is novel or \
complex. \
\
>SOCIAL LOAFING Social loafing refers to the phenomenon that people don't work as \
hard on a task when they are part of group as compared to when they are working alone. \
Social loafing most frequently occurs when people perceive that their individual efforts \
will be anonymous and thus not subject to individual evaluation. \
\
 \
\
                                     Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Diversity \
\
                     DIVERSITY \
\
The APA Ethics Code mandates awareness and respect for human differences in terms of \
age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national origin, religion, sexual \
orientation, disability, language, and socioeconomic status (SES). This section focuses \
primarily on the area of ethnicity and culture, and also includes small sections on \
socioeconomic status and on issues affecting LGBTQ people. \
\
>EMIC VS. ETIC Traditionally, psychology has taken an etic or universal view of people: \
it has assumed that there are universal principles underlying personality, psychopathology, \
and psychotherapy. For example, theories like those of Maslow and Rogers assume that \
optimal human development is the same for all individuals regardless of culture. \
Historically, psychology has taken an individualistic perspective, highly valuing traits such \
as autonomy and self-actualization. \
\
Increasingly, however, an emic or culture-specific view is being encouraged. From an emic \
perspective, every culture has its own norms and values. No one model of mental health \
can be applied to all. For example, what may be considered unhealthy neediness in one \
culture may be adaptive functioning in another. In general, interdependence and social \
relatedness are more highly valued in nonwestern cultures. \
\
  HINT: \
  ETic = ETernal truths about human beings \
  eMic = a Multicultural perspective \
\
>MULTICULTURALISM/CULTURAL DIVERSITY     Early models of minority \
mental health considered people from minority racial or cultural groups to be genetically \
deficient or culturally disadvantaged. The currently favored model. multiculturalism. \
considers all racial and ethnic groups to be on an equal level. White middle-class culture \
is no longer considered the yardstick by which all other cultures should be measured. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Immigration and Acculturation \
\
  7.5 IMMIGRATION AND ACCULTURATION \
\
>IMMIGRATION    Immigration is in itself a significant stressor. Studies have \
demonstrated higher rates of psychiatric hospitalization in the U.S. for immigrant groups. \
especially young men. Many immigrant families experience conflict and stress because the \
family members acculturate at different rates and to different degrees. Most often, children \
and teenagers acculturate more quickly than parents, and there ensues a clash of cultural \
values between the generations. Psychiatric problems tend to peak between one year and \
three years after immigration. \
\
>ACCULTURATION Acculturation is the process by which members of one cultural \
group learn about and adopt the beliefs and behaviors of another group. Although \
acculturation is usually in the direction of a minority group adopting habits and language \
patterns of the dominant group, acculturation can be reciprocal-that is, members of the \
dominant group can adopt patterns typical of the minority group. For example, some White \
teenagers adopt the clothing and speech of hip-hop culture. \
\
>ENCULTURATION Enculturation is defined as the process of learning one's own \
culture, influenced primarily by home and family. \
\
>BICULTURAL   Although different writers use the term bicultural differently, it \
generally refers to people who have successfully integrated two or more separate aspects \
of their cultural identity. Such values, beliefs, and behaviors can come both from the \
person's original cultural identity (e.g., minority) as well as from another culture (e.g., \
majority). Biculturalism is the final stage of most models of racial/cultural identity \
development (see below). \
\
I. BERRY'S THEORY OF ACCULTURATION \
\
J. W. Berry has proposed that the two key factors in the acculturation process are cultural \
maintenance, and contact and participation. Cultural maintenance refers to valuing and \
preserving cultural identity. Contact and participation refers to involvement with the \
dominant culture and other cultural groups. \
\
\
\
                          Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Immigration \
\
According to Berry's theory, there are four acculturation strategies based on the interaction \
of the two factors. \
\
>ASSIMILATION When individuals assimilate, they do not maintain their cultural \
identity, but they do seek regular interaction with other cultures. Assimilation may be \
evidenced by changes in language preference, adoption of dominant attitudes and values, \
membership in social groups and institutions, and loss of separate political or ethnic \
identification. \
\
>SEPARATION Separation occurs when individuals place value on their original culture \
and wish to avoid interaction with people from other cultures. \
\
>INTEGRATION    Integration occurs when people maintain their original cultural \
identity while also interacting with people from other cultures. \
\
>MARGINALIZATION   Marginalization occurs when people do not maintain their \
cultural identity and do not seek interaction with people from other cultures. \
\
\
 \
\
                           Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Physical and Mental Health \
\
     7.6 PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH \
\
I. HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION \
\
Overall, racial and cultural minorities are underrepresented in the mental health system. \
People from minority groups may not seek mental health services because they distrust the \
providers and agencies or view therapy as a potential instrument of oppression. \
\
In terms of general medical care, people of color do not receive the same quality of care \
that Whites do, resulting in a higher mortality rate among people of color. There is also a \
much higher rate of being uninsured among minorities, for example about 16% of \
Hispanics are uninsured compared to approximately 6% of Whites. Even when minorities \
are insured, they are more likely to rely on visits to the emergency room for their primary \
care, suggesting that they have less access to private physicians. \
\
II. CULTURAL ISSUES IN MENTAL DISORDERS \
\
>CROSS-CULTURAL VALIDITY OF MENTAL DISORDERS      Many mental \
disorders categorized in DSM-5 are found throughout the world with similar and \
recognizable symptoms. These disorders include schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, panic \
disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Prevalence rates for these disorders, \
including schizophrenia, are also relatively equivalent. \
\
>CROSS-CULTURAL VARIATION IN MENTAL DISORDERS    The prevalence \
rates of some disorders vary greatly across countries, presumably indicating that social and \
cultural factors play a causal role. For example, the prevalence rate of major depression \
ranges from 2 to 19 percent across countries. \
\
>CULTURAL CONCEPTS OF DISTRESS The DSM-5 describes cultural concepts of \
distress as the ways that cultural groups experience, understand, and communicate \
emotional pain, behavioral problems, or difficult thoughts. Cultural concepts of distress \
include cultural syndromes, cultural idioms of distress, and cultural explanations or \
perceived causes. \
\
\
\
                           Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Physical and Mental Health \
\
     CULTURAL SYNDROMES Cultural syndromes are clusters of attributions and \
     symptoms that tend to occur among persons in specific groups or communities, and \
     which are recognized as a pattern of experience (e.g., ataque de nervios). \
\
     CULTURAL IDIOMS OF DISTRESS Cultural idioms of distress are shared or \
     collective ways of expressing distress that may not involve specific syndromes or \
     symptoms (e.g .. "nerves"). Somatization, or the expression of distress through \
     somatic complaints, is a common idiom of distress. Certain physical symptoms are \
     more common among certain cultural groups than others (e.g., stomach symptoms \
     among Whites and Hispanics, cardiopulmonary symptoms among Asians). \
     Members of some cultural groups more easily admit to somatic complaints than \
     emotional distress. This preference to present with somatic complaints is viewed \
     by contemporary theorists as a sociocultural phenomenon and not as a reflection of \
     the patient's defensiveness or lack of psychological sophistication. \
\
     CULTURAL EXPLANATIONS OR PERCEIVED CAUSES       Cultural \
     explanations or perceived causes are the attributions, labels, or ways of explaining \
     the causes of illness, symptoms, or distress. \
\
III. CULTURAL ISSUES IN PSYCHOTHERAPY \
\
>CULTURAL ENCAPSULATION   Cultural encapsulation can significantly impede \
effective psychotherapy when clients are of a different cultures background than the \
therapist. Cultural encapsulation occurs when the therapist makes narrow assumptions \
about reality, minimizes cultural variation among individuals, disregards evidence \
disconfirming the superiority of the dominant culture, resorts to technique-oriented \
strategies and short-term solutions, and judges others according to the encapsulated \
therapist's self-reference criteria. \
\
>CULTURAL COMPETENCE Cultural competence refers to the ability to provide \
appropriate and effective services to minority group members, taking into consideration \
their languages, histories, traditions, and values. To be culturally competent, therapists \
must be aware of their own cultural values as well as the culture of their patients, and work \
to acquire the skills and knowledge to provide appropriate and effective treatment. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: SES \
\
      7.7 SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS (SES) \
\
The socioeconomic status of most racial minority groups is disproportionately lower than \
that of Whites. Lower SES has repeatedly been correlated with higher levels of mental \
illness and psychological distress. For example, people with the lowest level of SES are \
two to three times more likely to have a mental disorder than those with the highest level \
of SES. It is still controversial whether lower socioeconomic status causes mental illness \
(i.e., it is stressful to be poor), mental illness causes socioeconomic status (i.e., \
psychological problems impair effective behavior, causing "downward drift"), or \
diagnostic procedures are inherently biased. For example, in one study, individuals with \
identical symptoms were diagnosed as having schizophrenia when they were of low SES \
whereas they were diagnosed as having bipolar disorder when they were of higher SES. \
\
In psychotherapy, individuals of lower SES and education drop out at a higher rate than \
those of higher SES and education. They also tend to be assigned the least experienced \
counselors and psychotherapists. When individuals of lower SES remain in therapy. \
however, they derive as much benefit as those of higher SES. Some believe that SES may \
actually account for differences in treatment outcome that are typically attributed to race. \
\
\
\
                                Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Sexual Orientation \
\
            7.8 SEXUAL ORIENTATION \
\
LGBTQ people commonly face social stigmatization, discrimination, and even violence \
because of their sexual orientation. These experiences put gay men at greater risk for \
mental health problems and emotional distress. (Research is still sparse on the effect of \
these factors on lesbians.) Overall, however, extensive research shows that there are few \
significant differences in psychological functioning between heterosexual people and \
people who are LGBTQ. \
\
Adolescence poses unique challenges to LGBTQ youth. They are more likely than their \
heterosexual peers to abuse substances, attempt suicide, and become victims of violence, \
including within the family. Those who are rejected by their parents are more likely to \
become homeless, contract HIV, or become prostitutes. In middle and late adulthood, \
people in same-sex relationships tend to receive less support from their families of origin \
as compared to heterosexual people. \
\
The term heterosexism refers to ideas and actions that denigrate non-heterosexual \
behavior. Like racism and sexism, heterosexism can occur both on cultural and \
psychological levels. Although the terms homophobia and heterosexism are often used \
interchangeably, heterosexism is currently the favored term. The term homophobia \
implies fear and hatred of gays and lesbians. It refers to a specific mental state and is not \
as encompassing as heterosexism. \
\
I. GAY AND LESBIAN IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT \
\
R. R. Troiden has developed a model of gay and lesbian identity development that has four \
stages. \
\
>STAGE ONE: SENSITIZATION This stage occurs before puberty. The child feels \
different from peers, may be marginalized, and ultimately internalizes a negative self- \
concept. The child's sense of differentness is related more to gender (i.e., feeling different \
from other boys or girls) rather than to sexuality. \
\
>STAGE TWO: IDENTITY CONFUSION In this stage, which occurs around the age \
of 17 or 18. there is a growing recognition of homosexual feelings and impulses, and, at \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Sexual Orientation \
\
the same time, feelings of being excluded from the rest of the world. Thus significant \
 conflict is experienced. To cope, some individuals resort to denial, avoidance, or repair (an \
 attempt to become heterosexual). \
\
>STAGE THREE: IDENTITY ASSUMPTION The main task of this stage is to manage \
social stigma. During this stage, which occurs around ages 19 - 22, there is typically a \
reduction in social isolation and increased contact with other gays and lesbians. A variety \
of strategies can be employed in this stage: capitulation (agreeing with society's negative \
view of homosexuality though still identifying as a homosexual); minstralization (acting \
out stereotypically homosexual behavior); passing (hiding being homosexual most of the \
time, while identifying as a homosexual to oneself and/or a select group of people); and \
group alignment (immersing oneself in the gay and lesbian communities while still \
harboring negative attitudes about being homosexual). \
\
>STAGE FOUR: COMMITMENT This stage occurs around ages 22 - 23 and involves \
an integration of homosexual identity. People in this stage are more open about their sexual \
orientation, better able to make same-sex commitments, and are generally happier. \
\
\
\
                               Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Culture and Ethnicity \
\
          7.9 CULTURE AND ETHNICITY \
\
I. COMMUNICATION STYLES \
\
Communication styles differ significantly between cultures. Some of the differences \
include proxemics (use of personal space), kinesics (body movements, including facial \
expressions and eye contact), and paralanguage (vocal cues, including loudness, pauses, \
 and rate of speech). \
\
Cultures also differ in the importance placed on the context of the communication. \
\
>LOW-CONTEXT COMMUNICATION      In a low-context communication, the \
meaning of the communication is based on what is explicitly verbalized. What matters are \
the words that are actually said. Middle-class White American culture not only tends to use \
a low-context communication style, it actually tends to value this style highly (e.g., "say \
what you mean," "be direct"). \
\
>HIGH-CONTEXT COMMUNICATION      In a high-context communication, the \
situation and non-verbal cues significantly affect the meaning of what is verbalized. The \
same words can have an entirely different meaning depending on how and when they are \
said. For example, a hesitant "yes" in Filipino culture actually means a polite refusal. \
African Americans, Asian Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans generally use a \
high-context communication style. \
\
II. MINORITY IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT MODEL \
\
The Minority Identity Development Model is the most comprehensive and accepted of \
contemporary models of racial and cultural identity (Atkinson, Morton & Sue, 1993). Each \
of the five stages is defined in terms of attitudes toward the self, one's own minority group, \
different minority groups, and the dominant culture. \
\
>STAGE ONE: CONFORMITY In this first stage, the minority person unequivocally \
prefers the dominant culture. The person therefore has negative attitudes about oneself, \
one's own minority group, as well as other minority groups. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social Multicultural: Culture and Ethnicity \
\
>STAGE TWO: DISSONANCE In the dissonance stage, the person begins to appreciate \
aspects of the minority culture and to question the values and customs of the dominant \
culture. This stage is marked by conflict between the old deprecating attitudes toward \
oneself, one's minority group, and other minority groups, and the newer positive attitudes \
that are developing. \
\
>STAGE THREE: RESISTANCE (also called Immersion) In the resistance stage, the \
person tends to completely endorse minority-held views, experience a strong sense of \
identification with the minority group, and reject the dominant values of society and \
culture. The person experiences conflict between ethnocentrism and empathy for other \
minority groups. Racial pride is substituted for previous self-hatred. \
\
>STAGE FOUR: INTROSPECTION   Introspection involves a deeper analysis of \
attitudes and feelings. The person begins to discover that the level of intensity of negative \
feelings directed toward White society is draining. Furthermore, the person recognizes that \
many elements of White U.S. culture are highly functional and desirable. The person may \
feel that rigidly held onto minority-group views have weakened personal autonomy, and \
thus concerns are raised about uncritically appreciating one's group. Ethnocentrism also \
diminishes, and is replaced by an interest in the oppression experienced by other groups. \
\
>STAGE FIVE: SYNERGETIC ARTICULATION AND AWARENESS (also called \
Integrative Awareness) This final stage involves the ability to be both appreciative and \
appropriately critical of aspects of one's own culture, the dominant culture, and other \
minority cultures. \
\
III. BLACK IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT \
\
Some earlier, though similar, models of identity formation have focused solely on Black \
identity development. According to Jackson's model, a Black person's identity is strongly \
influenced by experiences of racism and oppression. The person moves through four \
stages: passive-acceptance, active-resistance, redirection, and internalization. \
\
>CROSS'S MODEL According to this model, an African American person moves \
through five stages, from a White frame of reference to a positive Black frame of reference: \
preencounter (similar to conformity), encounter (similar to dissonance), immersion- \
emersion (similar to resistance), internalization (similar to introspection and the \
beginning of synergetic articulation and awareness), and internalization-commitment \
(similar to synergetic articulation and awareness). \
\
\
\
                              Section 7 - Social Multicultural: Culture and Ethnicity \
\
IV. HELMS'S WHITE RACIAL IDENTITY \
DEVELOPMENT MODEL \
\
Helms developed a model of White racial identity development that includes six stages. \
\
>STAGE ONE: CONTACT In this stage, White individuals are fairly ignorant, and don't \
recognize racism and their own White privilege. There may be a curiosity, timidity or \
trepidation about people of color, and a superficial and inconsistent awareness of being \
White. Some White people remain in this stage indefinitely. \
\
>STAGE TWO: DISINTEGRATION    In this stage, individuals begin to feel \
uncomfortable with the advantages of being White, and with the role of Whites in \
maintaining racism. To cope with this dissonance, many individuals deny the existence of \
racism or avoid people of color. \
\
>STAGE THREE: REINTEGRATION    In the reintegration stage, the person \
consciously acknowledges a White identity, including the belief that Whites are superior \
to people of color. Thus, the person in the reintegration stage accepts the belief in White \
racial superiority and the inferiority of other racial groups. \
\
>STAGE FOUR: PSEUDO-INDEPENDENCE In the fourth stage, the person begins to \
actively question the proposition that Blacks are innately inferior to Whites, Some Whites \
in this stage try to disavow their own Whiteness and associate with people of color. This \
attempt usually results in a sense of alienation from Whites, as well as from many people \
of color who are suspicious of their friendliness. \
\
>STAGE FIVE: IMMERSION/EMERSION    Self-examination and information- \
seeking characterize this stage. The person examines his or her own racial identity, striving \
to replace myths about race with accurate information. One outcome may be trying to \
change White people and their attitudes towards people of color. \
\
>STAGE SIX: AUTONOMY In this stage, the person achieves a positive redefinition of \
being White that includes an ongoing openness to new information and new ways of \
thinking about racial and cultural variables. \
\
 HINT: Although "integration" is usually seen as a positive, such as "integrative \
 awareness" in the minority identity model, the reintegration stage of Helms's model is \
 not positive, as it involves endorsing White racial superiority. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Culture and Ethnicity \
\
V. CULTURAL GROUPS \
\
Although the U.S. includes many diverse ethnic and cultural groups, there are four \
recognized minority groups: Hispanic Americans, African Americans, Asian \
Americans/Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans/Alaska Natives. According to the 2010 \
census, the ethnic breakdown of the U.S. population is: 17% Hispanic American, 13% \
African American, 5% Asian American, 1% Native American, and 63% White (non- \
Hispanic). About one third of all new entrants into the workforce are minorities. \
\
Current multicultural guidelines encourage psychologists to learn about the cultures of the \
people with whom they work. At the same time, psychologists are cautioned against \
oversimplification and stereotyping. In fact, there is tremendous heterogeneity within each \
of the recognized minority groups. For example, there are 43 different ethnic subgroups \
among Asian Americans/Pacific Islanders, with over 100 different languages and dialects \
spoken. Very often, within-group differences are greater than between-group differences. \
For example, a recent immigrant from Honduras may differ more from a third-generation \
Mexican American who speaks only English than either do from a middle-class White \
American. \
\
A. HISPANIC AMERICANS \
\
By the year 2050, over one-fourth of the U.S. population will identify as Hispanic. Hispanic \
culture is generally considered collateral as opposed to individualistic, because it highly \
values family and social connectedness. \
\
>MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES Central American immigrants often have a history of \
significant war-related trauma and high rates of PTSD. Cultural concepts of distress among \
Hispanics include susto (fright), nervios (nerves), mal de ojo (evil eye), and attaque de \
nervios (screaming, crying, aggression, dissociation, fainting). \
\
Emotional symptoms are often expressed in terms of physical complaints. In other words, \
the Hispanic idioms of distress are often somatic in nature. It is therefore very important \
that this illness language is not mistaken for somatie symptom disorders. Somatie symptom \
disorders should be diagnosed with care among Hispanics. \
\
As with other minorities, Hispanics tend to be underserved by the mental health system. \
There are proportionately very few Hispanic mental health professionals. Because an \
estimated 32% of the Hispanic population does not speak English fluently, language often \
\
\
\
                              Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Culture and Ethnicity \
\
establishing a positive alliance, while keeping in mind that trust will develop if the therapist \
is able to convey respect. Overall, the therapy relationship should be egalitarian. \
\
There is some research to suggest that a Black person's stage of racial identity may affect \
attitudes toward counseling, with those in any stage other than the first preferring to see a \
Black counselor. Other research suggests that the key variable is whether the therapist is \
culturally sensitive. \
\
Nancy Boyd-Franklin advocates a multisystems approach to working with African \
American and other minority families. From this perspective, a family's struggle must be \
understood not only in terms of family dynamics and family systems, but in its larger \
environmental and cultural context. She encourages meetings outside of the consultation \
room and active involvement with the different systems that influence clients, such as the \
school, the church, social services, and the extended family. \
\
In the area of assessment of intelligence, some research does indicate that African \
American children perform better when assessed by same-race examiners. However, the \
more powerful variable appears to be the examiner's competence, expertise, and ability to \
establish rapport with the child. \
\
C. ASIAN AMERICANS/PACIFIC ISLANDERS \
\
Some theorists characterize Asian American culture as collateral, because interdependence \
is favored over autonomy. Other theorists consider it lineal, because there are clear lines of \
authority. The family structure tends to be hierarchical and patriarchal. \
\
>MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES Cultural concepts of distress among Asian Americans \
include neurasthenia and hwa-byung ("suppressed anger syndrome," involving \
palpitations, headache, dysphoria, and anxiety). Among Southeast Asian refugees, PTSD \
occurs at a high rate because of traumas experienced before or during immigration. \
\
Asian Americans utilize mental health treatment at a very low rate, most likely because \
shame and stigma are associated with having mental health problems. These problems may \
be expressed in an indirect manner, through physical complaints and academic or \
vocational problems. Language also poses a significant barrier to treatment for about a \
third of all Asian Americans. \
\
>IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT Research has shown that Asian Americans \
generally prefer a structured therapeutic approach in which the therapist is active and \
\
\
 \
\
                                  Section 7 - Social & Multicultural: Culture and Ethnicity \
\
   directive. When Asian American patients are matched with therapists of the same ethnicity, \
   they are less likely to drop out of treatment. \
\
   D. NATIVE AMERICANS/ALASKA NATIVES \
\
   Currently, only 20% of Native Americans live on reservations or trust lands. The poverty \
   rate among all Native Americans is twice that of the general population. Native Americans \
   traditionally have a general world view that emphasizes connectedness, balance, and \
   completeness. \
\
   >MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES The suicide rate for Native Americans is 1.5 times the \
   national rate, and is especially high among males ages 15 to 24. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome \
   and alcohol-related deaths are more common among Native Americans than the general \
   population. Higher rates of PTSD stem from a rate of violent victimization that is more \
   than twice the national average. \
\
   There is a long tradition of healing rituals among Native Americans who make no \
   distinction between mental and physical illness. Alternative medicine practices are utilized \
   at a rate equal to or greater than that of Whites. \
\
   >IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT Interestingly, controversy surrounds the best \
   treatment approach, with some advocating a non-directive approach and others considering \
   it a "disaster." Family therapy, especially if it involves the extended family, should be used \
   when possible. Incorporating traditional healing practices is generally recommended. \
\
   \
\
DEVELOPMENTAL                       PSYCHOLOGY \
\
                           SECTION 8 \
\
                        PsychPrep \
                         PASS EFFICIENTLY \
 \
\
       SECTION 8: DEVELOPMENTAL \
                   PSYCHOLOGY \
\
Developmental psychology focuses on age-related changes in behavior and abilities \
 throughout the lifespan, from conception to death. This section first describes some of the \
 basic concepts relevant to human development, and then focuses on physical development, \
 cognitive development, and psychosocial development. This section concludes with a \
 discussion of risk and protective factors in development. \
\
                8.1 BASIC CONCEPTS \
\
 I. TYPES OF DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGE \
\
 It has been proposed that there are two kinds of developmental change: qualitative and \
 quantitative. \
\
 >QUALITATIVE CHANGE Stage theorists, including Piaget, Kohlberg, and Erikson, \
 propose that development is discontinuous, and that periods of little change alternate with \
 periods of abrupt and rapid change. According to stage theorists, children who do not \
 master stage-specific issues are at increased risk for subsequent developmental failures. \
 Stage theorists assert that differences between adults and children are qualitative rather \
 than quantitative. For example, differences in thinking between the concrete operational \
 child and formal operational adolescent represent a qualitative shift in thinking, rather than \
 simply knowing more. \
\
 >QUANTITATIVE CHANGE    Continuity proponents, including Robbie Case, a \
 proponent of the information processing approach, argue that development is continuous, \
 with new abilities, skills, and knowledge developing gradually and relatively uniformly \
 over time. This model suggests that differences between adults and children in terms of \
 thinking and behavior are more quantitative, rather than qualitative. For example, an adult \
 can remember more than a child because of maturation of neurological processes, a \
developmental process that proceeds steadily and gradually over time. \
\
 \
\
                                     Section 8 - Developmental: Basic Concepts \
\
 II. INFLUENCES ON DEVELOPMENT \
\
 Development is influenced by many factors. Broadly these can be classified as genetic and \
 environmental influences, and normative and non-normative influences. \
\
 A. GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCES \
\
 Heredity refers to the inborn genetic endowment that a person receives from his or her \
 biological parents. Environmental influences refer to influences outside the person, \
 beginning in the womb. Teasing out the specific impact of either heredity or environment \
 on development is difficult, as the distinction between the two quickly blurs. \
\
 Current models of development propose that genetic and environmental variables transact \
 continually over time. Some research suggests that with regard to certain aspects of \
 development (e.g., personality, IQ), the relative weight of genetic and environmental \
 influences changes over time. It has been suggested that environment affects outcome more \
 significantly in the early years than in later adulthood. For example, environmental \
 influences explain significant variability in IQ in childhood, but not in adolescence. There \
appears to be a gradual penetrance throughout life of genetic predispositions. \
\
 When it comes to environmental influences, Urie Bronfenbrenner has proposed an \
 ecological approach to development that delineates five levels of environmental influence. \
 He suggests that to understand a person's development, we must study the person in the \
 context of multiple environments: the microsystem, the mesosystem, the exosystem, the \
 macrosystem, and the chronosystem. \
\
 >THE MICROSYSTEM   The microsystem is the everyday environment the person \
 encounters, and includes the home, school, work, or neighborhood. The microsystem \
 consists of bi-directional relationships with parents, siblings, teachers, friends, etc. \
\
 >THE MESOSYSTEM   The mesosystem consists of the interaction or links between \
 various microsystems, such as the home and school, work and friends, etc. For example, a \
 child's parents meet with his teacher to strategize how to facilitate learning for him. \
\
 >THE EXOSYSTEM The exosystem describes the relationship between two or more \
 settings, at least one of which does not contain the person, but indirectly affects him or her. \
 For example, a child is not directly involved in the parents' workplace but may nevertheless \
 be very influenced by how the workplace affects the parents. \
\
 \
 \
\
                                     Section 8 - Developmental: Basic Concepts \
\
>THE MACROSYSTEM The macrosystem includes the influences of culture, religion, \
 the economy and political systems. \
\
 >THE CHRONOSYSTEM The chronosystem addresses the role of the passage of time \
 in the person's life. It encompasses changes that take place in the family, such as birth of \
 siblings or moving to a new neighborhood, as well as changes in the larger environment, \
 such as economic growth or war. \
\
 B. NORMATIVE AND NON-NORMATIVE INFLUENCES \
\
 Psychologists and researchers make the distinction between normative and non-normative \
 events that influence development. \
\
>NORMATIVE INFLUENCES ON DEVELOPMENT    Normative events are those \
 that occur in a similar way for most people. Normative events are further classified as either \
 age-graded or history-graded. \
\
      AGE-GRADED NORMATIVE EVENTS An age-graded normative event is an \
     event that is commonly experienced by people of a particular age group. Examples \
     include puberty and menopause, entering kindergarten, or retirement. \
\
     HISTORY-GRADED NORMATIVE EVENTS    A history-graded normative \
     event is an event that is common to a particular cohort, for example, the great \
     depression, the Vietnam war, women's liberation, or the impact of television and \
     computers. \
\
>NON-NORMATIVE INFLUENCES ON DEVELOPMENT     Non-normative life \
 events are unusual events that have a major impact on an individual's life. Non-normative \
 events can include typical events that occur at an atypical time of life, such as death of a \
 parent when the child is young, or atypical events such as a birth defect, or a fire consuming \
 one's home. \
\
 C. CRITICAL AND SENSITIVE PERIODS \
\
>CRITICAL PERIODS A critical period is defined as a specific time during an \
 organism's life span when it is most sensitive to environmental influences or stimulation. \
 A specific structure or phenomenon must occur during the critical period, or it will not \
 occur at all. For example, during the embryonic stage of development (the first eight weeks \
\
 \
\
                                     Section 8 - Developmental: Basic Concepts \
\
 after conception), certain organs form. If they do not form properly at this stage, they will \
 never be able to develop properly. The embryo is thus most vulnerable to (i.e., \
 agents that cause birth defects) during this critical period. Another famous example of \
 critical periods was Konrad Lorenz's finding that goslings that had imprinted on him \
 between 12 and 17 hours after birth continued to follow him even when other geese later \
 became available as models. \
\
 >SENSITIVE PERIODS In the study of human development, particularly cognitive and \
 emotional development, the term sensitive period is preferred over critical period. During \
 a sensitive period, stimulation and learning has more of an impact than it will at any other \
 time. For example, children learn language best and most easily from the ages of one to \
 three. However, children who are deprived of language during these years can still develop \
 language later. \
\
 Unlike animals who have critical periods in attachment behavior, human children are able \
 to make attachments after the first year of life. In fact, these attachments can be of equal \
 intensity and quality as those from the first year of life. One of the most encouraging \
 consequences of this finding is that many adopted children are still able to make healthy \
 attachments to caregivers even in late childhood. \
 . \
\
 \
 \
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Pinsical Development \
\
         8.2 PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
This section focuses on physical development throughout the lifespan, beginning with \
heredity. This is followed by a description of the physical aspects of prenatal development, \
development in infancy and childhood, adolescent and adult development, and physical \
development in late adulthood. \
\
I. HEREDITY \
\
A. BASIC CONCEPTS \
\
Genes and chromosomes transmit hereditary characteristics. From conception, each human \
cell contains 23 pairs of chromosomes, on which there are thousands of genes, the carriers \
of hereditary traits. The gene is composed of DNA and RNA, which contain the genetic \
code. In addition to its genetic importance, RNA has been noted to have a significant role \
in memory functioning. \
\
Of the 23 pairs of chromosomes, 22 pairs are autosomes chromosomes unrelated to \
sexual expression. The twenty-third pair consists of the two sex chromosomes, one coming \
from the father, the other from the mother. The sex chromosome of every ovum is an X, \
but the sperm may contain either an X or a Y. When an X-carrying sperm fertilizes the \
ovum, the zygote formed is XX, a female. In contrast, when a Y-carrying sperm fertilizes \
the ovum, the zygote formed is XY, a male. \
\
>GENOTYPE   The genotype is the genetic makeup of the person, containing both \
expressed and unexpressed characteristics. \
\
>PHENOTYPE The phenotype is the observable characteristics of the person. \
\
Some genes have strong penetrance, and they express themselves in virtually all \
environments (e.g., genes for height). By contrast, many genes (e.g., genes for weight) have \
only partial penetrance, and environmental factors are strongly associated with their \
expression. Twin studies are most commonly used to assess the relative genetic, \
biological, or dispositional contribution to a variable or variables under study. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Physical Development \
\
B. GENETIC & CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES \
\
Every year, about 6% of babies born in the United States are born with physical or mental \
disabilities. Many of these disabilities are due to genetic and chromosomal abnormalities. \
Some abnormalities are due to sex chromosome abnormalities, such as Klinefelter's and \
Turner's. The majority, however, are due to autosomal abnormalities. These include Down \
syndrome, PKU, and sickle cell anemia. \
\
>KLINEFELTER'S SYNDROME   Klinefelter's syndrome occurs only in men and \
results from an extra X chromosome (XXY). Men with Klinefelter's tend to be taller, less \
intelligent (IQ around 90), and have abnormal development of secondary sex \
characteristics (e.g., partial breast development, small testicles, high pitched voice). They \
are unable to have children. \
\
>TURNER'S SYNDROME Turner's syndrome occurs only in women and results from \
a missing X chromosome (X0). These women generally have normal intelligence but have \
abnormal development of secondary sexual characteristics (e.g., no menstruation, no \
ovulation). \
\
>DOWN SYNDROME Down syndrome, or trisomy 21, involves three chromosomes on \
chromosome 21. Down syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability, a broad skull, \
slanted eyes, physical deformities, and reduced activity. \
\
>PKU (PHENYLKETONURIA) PKU is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder \
caused by a defective gene that affects metabolism, such that phenylalanine cannot be \
metabolized. PKU can result in severe mental deficiency. If detected early, babies can be \
put on a special phenylalanine-free diet, which will ward off these serious problems. \
\
>HEMOPHILIA   Hemophilia is a sex-linked recessive disorder that causes excessive \
bleeding. Found predominantly in males, it requires frequent transfusion of blood with \
clotting factors. \
\
>SICKLE-CELL ANEMIA Sickle-cell anemia is an autosomal recessive disorder that \
occurs primarily in African Americans, with one in 500 African Americans having the \
disease, and one in 12 being carriers. Sickle-cell anemia results in deformed, fragile red \
blood cells that can clog the blood vessels, causing anemia, severe pain, stunted growth \
and frequent infections. Treatment includes transfusions and painkillers. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Physical Development \
\
II. PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
Conception or fertilization occurs when the female's ovum combines with the male's \
sperm, forming a new cell, the zygote. The period between conception and birth is called \
gestation and lasts nine months for humans. During gestation, the zygote multiplies itself \
through the process of cell division and develops into an embryo, and then a fetus. \
\
The prenatal period is divided into three stages, including the germinal, embryonic, and \
fetal stages. \
\
>THE GERMINAL PERIOD During the germinal period, which lasts from conception \
to two weeks, the zygote rapidly divides and ultimately implants itself onto the uterus wall. \
\
>THE EMBRYONIC PERIOD The embryonic period lasts from two weeks (the time \
of implantation on the uterus wall) to eight to twelve weeks. The embryonic stage involves \
the start and rapid development of the major organ systems and structures, including the \
nervous, respiratory, circulatory and digestive systems, as well as the eyes, ears, and limbs. \
Almost all birth defects occur during the first trimester. \
\
The embryo is most vulnerable to the effects of teratogenic agents (agents that cause birth \
defects) such as medications, virus, or radiation in the first eight to twelve weeks, when \
basic structures are being formed. \
\
>THE FETAL PERIOD The fetal period lasts from eight to twelve weeks until birth. \
This stage involves rapid growth, with the organs and other systems developing more \
complexity. In addition, less crucial body parts, such as nails and lashes, begin to form. \
\
During the fetal period and for the first few years of life, growth and development proceed \
in a cephalocaudal fashion (from the top of the body down), which means that the head \
and upper body develop before the lower body. \
\
A. MATERNAL FACTORS IN PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
Several maternal factors affect the development of the embryo or fetus, including nutrition \
and substance use. \
\
>NUTRITION The mother's diet during pregnancy bears significant impact on the health \
of the fetus. Malnutrition is most detrimental while the fetus is still in utero, at a time when \
significant physical growth and brain development is taking place. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Physical Development \
\
>ALCOHOL    Excessive alcohol use during pregnancy can result in fetal alcohol \
syndrome (FAS), characterized by delayed growth, physical deformities, delayed motor \
development, decreased intelligence and learning disabilities, short attention span, \
restlessness, irritability, and hyperactivity. \
\
>COCAINE Cocaine use during pregnancy has been associated with an increased risk \
of spontaneous abortion, prematurity, low birth weight, neurological problems, and a \
smaller head circumference. Babies exposed to cocaine in utero are not as alert or \
responsive emotionally or cognitively as babies who have not been exposed to cocaine. In \
later years, problems with organization, language skills, and emotional attachment are \
commonly evidenced. \
\
>NICOTINE Nicotine use during pregnancy can result in infant death and low birth \
weight. In addition, in school aged children, long-term complications are similar to those \
found in children whose mothers abuse alcohol during pregnancy, and include poor \
attention span, hyperactivity, lower IQ, and perceptual-motor problems. \
\
B. SEXUAL DIMORPHISM \
\
Sexual dimorphism refers to the systematic differences between individuals of different \
sex in the same species. Sex differences in humans are thought to result from an interaction \
between environmental and biological factors; the details of this process are still being \
worked out. One theory, the organizational/activational hypothesis, proposes that \
hormones influence sex differences in two phases. First, in early life, males and females \
are exposed to different levels of the hormones that organize the nervous system. Second, \
at puberty, males and females are exposed to different levels of the sex steroids that activate \
the previously organized nervous system. Overall, humans exhibit less sexual dimorphism \
than many other species. A hot area of research and controversy, sexual dimorphism is \
clearly evident in the human brain. For example, women tend to have a denser corpus \
callosum. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Physical Development \
\
III. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT DURING INFANCY AND \
CHILDHOOD \
\
This section describes significant aspects of physical development during infancy and \
childhood, including reflexes, perceptual development, motor development and brain \
development. \
\
A. REFLEXES \
\
Infants are born with a number of reflexes, many of which are present in utero. These \
reflexes include the Moro reflex, the rooting reflex, the Babinski or plantar reflex, the grasp \
reflex, and the sucking reflex. Most of these reflexes disappear during the first year. \
\
>MORO REFLEX   The Moro reflex involves the baby extending the legs, arms, and \
fingers, and arching the back in response to being startled (e.g., by a loud noise or by being \
dropped). \
\
>ROOTING REFLEX The rooting reflex is characterized by the baby turning the head, \
opening the mouth and beginning sucking movements in response to the baby's cheek \
being stroked with a finger or nipple. \
\
>BABINSKI REFLEX The Babinski reflex is characterized by the baby spreading out \
the toes and twisting the foot when the sole of the baby's foot is stroked. \
\
>GRASP REFLEX In the grasp reflex, the baby makes a firm fist around an object that \
is placed in the hand. \
\
B. PERCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
Perceptual development includes the senses of touch and pain, taste, hearing, smell, and \
vision. With the exception of vision, most of the infant's senses are well developed at birth. \
\
>TOUCH AND PAIN The sense of touch is the first sense to develop, and it is believed \
to be the most mature of the senses during the first few months of life. There is indication \
that infants feel pain from birth and become more sensitive to pain in the days after \
delivery. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Physical Development \
\
>TASTE Newborns seem to prefer tastes that are sweet over those which are sour or \
bitter. The preference for sweet tastes has adaptive functions, since the mother's milk is \
rather sweet. Infants tend to reject foods that do not taste good. \
\
>HEARING The sense of hearing is well developed at birth and is actually believed to \
be acute before birth. Newborn infants have the ability to distinguish sounds, for example, \
between new speech sounds and more familiar ones. Research suggests that infants prefer \
female voices, and that newborns are able to recognize speech as a special class of sound. \
\
>SMELL The sense of smell is well developed at birth. There is evidence that infants can \
differentiate the smell of their mother's milk from that of a stranger. \
\
>VISION Vision is not well developed at birth. The newborn's peripheral vision is very \
narrow, although it develops rapidly between two and ten weeks. Color perception is poor \
until about four months. Acuity at birth is poor (somewhere between 20/200 and 20/600). \
and the infant achieves 20/20 acuity between six months and two years. At birth, the infant \
is incapable of binocular vision, and thus lacks the capacity for depth perception. Binocular \
vision typically develops at about four or five months of age. \
\
Gaze fixation and visual following of faces provides evidence that infants generally prefer \
visual stimuli that resemble faces. By one month, infants can distinguish their mother's \
face from that of others. \
\
Cross-modal fluency refers to the ability to imitate facial expressions. This ability, which \
is first exhibited at two to three weeks of age, involves matching a visual schema of a facial \
expression with a proprioceptive-tactile schema of the act that produces the facial \
expression. \
\
At two months, the social smile emerges and the infant smiles when a face (or even a face- \
like mask) is presented. \
\
C. MOTOR DEVELOPMENT \
\
Milestones in motor development during infancy and the corresponding average ages are \
as follows: ability to lift head (6 weeks), rolling over (4 months), sitting alone (7 months). \
crawling (9 months), standing with support (9 months), standing alone (12 months), first \
steps and walking alone (12 - 15 months), and walking up steps (16 months). Rates of \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Physical Development \
\
motor skill development are fairly equivalent among boys and girls. In terms of toilet \
training, it is not recommended that toilet training begin much before 24 months. \
\
Motor development progresses rapidly during the preschool years, especially in terms of \
development of gross motor skills (e.g., jumping and running). At the age of six to seven, \
children enter a new stage of biological development during which motor sequencing \
behaviors are performed more smoothly and accurately, and athletic prowess becomes \
apparent. \
\
D. BRAIN DEVELOPMENT \
\
The brain develops faster than any other part of the body during the prenatal period and the \
first two years of life. At birth, the brain is 25% to 33% of its adult size, by age two about \
75%, and by age 5 about 90%. There are five stages in brain development. In the \
proliferation stage, new cells are created within the neural tube. This occurs when the \
embryo is about 2 - 3 weeks old. During the second stage of migration, immature neurons \
migrate to specific brain locations and start to join other neurons to form brain structures. \
This occurs when the embryo is about 8 weeks. The third stage is differentiation, in which \
neurons begin to take on a more differentiated or distinct look, developing axons and \
dendrites. Following differentiation is myelination in which a myelin sheath is developed \
around the axons of some neurons. Most myelination takes place after birth. The final stage \
is synaptogenesis, in which the synapses are formed. Synaptogenesis also predominantly \
takes place postnatally. \
\
The infant's brain at birth contains the majority of neurons it will ever have. After birth, \
brain development occurs as the neurons grow in size, become myelinated, develop more \
axons and dendrites, and increase their connections. It is thought that synaptic connections \
strengthen in response to experience. \
\
The brain of a young child has significant capacity for plasticity, or flexibility in \
functioning. For example, up until the age of about seven or eight, children can recover \
language function if the dominant hemisphere has been damaged. After seven or eight \
years, however, progress is limited. It is believed that by age seven or eight, considerable \
sensory integration occurs, and the brain has lateralized functioning (different hemispheres \
control different functions). As a result, there is a firmly established pattern of handedness \
and footedness. By age seven or eight there is also increasingly mature performance on \
tests of visual-motor and neuroperceptual skills. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Pinsical Development \
\
By middle childhood, hippocampal development appears complete, with capacities for \
declarative memory emerging in addition to procedural memory. By the age of ten, children \
brought up unilingually have difficulty learning to speak an unaccented second language. \
\
Some brain development does continue beyond adolescence. Myelination, for example, \
continues into a person's twenties, enhancing processing speed, attention span and frontal \
lobe functioning. \
\
IV. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT DURING ADOLESCENCE \
AND ADULTHOOD \
\
Puberty is a biological event. It involves the maturation of the sexual system and marks the \
possibility for successful reproduction. During puberty, growth hormones and gonadal \
hormones initiate and sustain a growth spurt that causes dramatic increases in height, \
weight, and the skeletal system. Puberty typically occurs between 10 and 12 years of age \
for girls and includes menarche, the first menstrual period. For boys, it typically occurs \
between 12 and 14 years of age and includes the spermarche, the first ejaculation. As a \
result of hormonal secretions, secondary sexual characteristics develop such as facial hair, \
breasts, deepening of the voice, etc. \
\
Early physical maturation has different effects for boys and girls in the United States. Boys \
who physically mature early tend to enjoy a more positive psychological adjustment \
overall, with better scholastic performance, better self-image, and greater popularity. One \
study suggests, however, that early maturing boys may exhibit greater behavior problems. \
For girls, early physical maturation has mixed effects, including higher academic \
achievement and independence, but lower self-esteem, poorer body image, and more \
conflicts with parents. In fact, when these early maturing girls lower their academic \
achievement, they actually become more popular and have a more positive self-image. \
Some researchers have found that by twelfth grade, differences between early and late \
maturers have disappeared for both boys and girls. \
\
In middle age, typically between 45 and 55, women experience menopause, the end of the \
menstrual cycle. Decreases in estrogen production result in physical changes but current \
research does not support the myth of menopause as a time of psychological instability, \
loss of sexual interest, mood swings, and depression. The term male climacteric describes \
the more gradual changes that occur in men due to decreased testosterone, such as weight \
gain, loss of muscle strength, graying of hair, and diminished sexual responsiveness. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Development \
\
V. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT DURING LATE \
ADULTHOOD \
\
>AGING A variety of physical abilities gradually decline after middle age and into late \
adulthood. Cardiac output decreases, blood pressure increases, and visual and hearing \
acuity decline. The central nervous system begins to degenerate with loss of neurons and \
changes in tissues and supporting neurons. Many of these decreases, however, are \
dramatically affected by the environment and lifestyle choices. \
\
The maximum human life span appears to be between 110 and 120 years. Two explanations \
for aging include primary aging and secondary aging. \
\
     PRIMARY AGING The upper limit on the human life span is thought to be due \
     to primary aging, the inevitable changes in physical and mental processes. \
     Explanations for primary aging include programmed theories, which hold that \
     aging is genetically controlled, and the wear-and-tear theory which holds that daily \
     stressors wear out the body's cells. \
\
     SECONDARY AGING    Secondary aging results from disease, disuse, and \
     neglect of the body. Secondary aging may account for much of the deterioration \
     typically associated with growing old in our society. \
\
>SEXUAL ACTIVITY Sex drive does not tend to diminish with age, and the likelihood \
of sexual activity in the later years is closely related to the frequency of sexual activity \
during younger years. Research has indicated that people who were sexually active are \
likely to remain sexually active during old age. Men who have been sexually active can \
generally engage in some sort of sexual activity well into their seventies or even eighties. \
while women are physiologically able to be sexually active as long as they live. For women, \
the lack of an available partner is typically the main barrier to sexual activity. \
\
PSYCHPREP       Copyright \'80 2019 Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 8/Developmental/13 \
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Physical Development \
\
VI. HEALTH \
\
A variety of factors are thought to affect health outcomes. \
\
>THE HEALTH BELIEF MODEL The health belief model focuses on how perceptions \
of vulnerability and beliefs about illness influence health behavior (e.g., to what extent the \
person modifies diet, exercises, or receives inoculations). The health belief model is \
multicausal and proposes that health behavior results from the joint influence of \
psychosocial factors (e.g., demographic variables, peer pressure), perceived susceptibility \
to disease and perceived seriousness of the disease, as well as the perceived benefits of \
preventative action versus perceived barriers to preventative action. \
\
>HEALTH RISK FACTORS AND LIFE EXPECTANCY Research has identified \
smoking as the single most significant source of preventable health risks and premature \
deaths. Obesity is thought to be the most common nutritional problem among older adults \
in the United States. Overeating, lack of exercise, and lack of a balanced diet are the major \
contributing factors. It is therefore important to assess nutrition in older adults as it is a \
highly significant factor contributing to overall well-being. \
\
Gender and race affect life expectancy. In terms of gender, women tend to outlive men. In \
terms of race, White Americans typically outlive non-White Americans. \
\
>STRESS AND HEALTH Research on the impact of stress on well-being has suggested \
that a good support network can reduce the risk of emotional distress. However, it is not so \
much the size of the social network that is important, but the person's perception of having \
an adequate social network. This is known as the social buffer hypothesis. \
\
The Holmes and Rahe Social Readjustment Rating Scale (1967) was developed to measure \
life stress and to be used as a tool for examining the stress-illness relationship. The scale \
consists of 43 items ranging in point value from most stressful at 100 (death of a spouse). \
followed by divorce at 73 points, on down. Other items included are marriage (50 points). \
retirement (45), death of a close friend (37), and foreclosure on a home (30). \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 8 - Developmental: Cognitive Development \
\
         8.3 COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT \
\
This section focuses on cognitive development throughout the lifespan. This section \
includes a description of language development/reading, cognitive development, and moral \
development. \
\
I. LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/READING \
\
A. STAGES OF LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT \
\
It is believed that language development proceeds through the same stages regardless of \
which language a child is learning. These stages include crying, cooing, babbling, word \
comprehension, echolalia, holophrasic speech, and telegraphic speech. \
\
>CRYING Crying is the newborn's only means of communication. Different patterns, \
pitches and intensities can signal hunger, sleepiness, or anger. \
\
>COOING Between six weeks and three months babies begin to coo and laugh. Cooing \
includes squeals, gurgles, and sounds like "ahhh." \
\
>BABBLING Babbling involves repeating consonant-vowel strings, such as ma-ma-ma. \
Babbling typically begins between four and six months. While infants initially babble in \
the sounds of all languages, they begin to restrict babbling sounds to those of their own \
language by about six months of age. \
\
>WORD COMPREHENSION By about nine to ten months, babies begin to understand \
words such as "no" or the baby's name. \
\
>ECHOLALIA    Echolalia involves deliberate imitation of sounds without \
comprehension. At about nine to ten months babies are able to string together sounds in a \
pattern that sounds like language, but has no meaning. Additionally, at around this time, \
children lose the ability to differentiate sounds that are not part of the language they hear \
spoken. \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
>HOLOPHRASIC SPEECH The average baby says a first word sometime between 10 \
and 14 months. During the stage of holophrasic speech (typically 12 - 18 months), babies \
use a single word or even a syllable to express a complete thought. The smallest unit of \
speech is the phoneme (e.g., da), and the smallest meaningful unit is termed a morpheme \
(e.g., daddy). By 15 months, the typical toddler uses 10 different words, while language \
comprehension is much greater. By 18 months, the median expressive vocabulary is 50 \
words. \
\
>TELEGRAPHIC SPEECH   The next important linguistic breakthrough comes when \
the toddler puts two words together to express one idea. Generally children do this between \
18 and 24 months. By 24 months, the median vocabulary is 200 words. Typically. \
vocabulary grows most rapidly between two-and-a-half and three years. \
\
B. THEORIES OF LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT \
\
Theories about language development have been split along nature versus nurture lines. \
Proponents of the nativist position argue that an inborn mechanism is responsible for \
acquiring language, while proponents of the nurture position argue that language is \
acquired through experience. \
\
>THE NATIVIST VIEW    Noam Chomsky exemplifies the nativist view. He \
hypothesized that children are born with an innate language acquisition device (LAD), a \
pre-wiring for language, so they require only minimal exposure to adult language in order \
to develop speech. Chomsky argues that the LAD enables children's brains to analyze the \
language that they hear around them and to make sense of its rules of grammar and syntax. \
\
Support for the nativist position includes the fact that children generally learn their native \
language in the same sequence, without receiving any formal instruction. Furthermore, \
newborns seem to have the capacity to differentiate between similar sounds. \
\
>THE NURTURIST VIEW Those who favor a nurturist position contend that language \
is acquired by means of interaction with the environment, through a process of imitation \
and reinforcement. Nurturists contend that children initially make random sounds, and only \
those that are reinforced by adults are eventually repeated. Children are also reinforced for \
imitating the sounds that they hear. Nurturists further argue that children learn grammar \
through exposure to examples of correct syntax. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
>THE INTERACTIONIST VIEW Currently most favored is the interactionist position, \
which holds that language development results from the combination of both nature and \
nurture. According to this view, children have an inborn mechanism for acquiring \
language, which is influenced by biological and cognitive maturation, as well as \
interactions with the environment. \
\
One of the most significant sources of environmental influence is a baby's parent. Parents \
repeat the sounds that the baby makes, and when the child is starting to talk, parents repeat \
the child's words and pronounce them correctly. Further, parents expand the child's speech \
by adding to it, for example, when the child says "me go," the parent says, "yes, you want \
to go." \
\
Most parents speak slowly to their infants, in simple statements, using small words, and a \
high-pitched voice. This is known as "Motherese" or child-directed speech, and occurs \
across all languages and social classes. \
\
Some research has found that mothers talk to their daughters more, and that girls are \
generally more advanced than boys in language development. \
\
In terms of the environmental influence of a bilingual home, at one point it was thought \
that children exposed to two languages showed early deficiencies in both languages. \
Current research suggests that these deficiencies don't occur and that, in fact, knowledge \
of two languages may increase cognitive flexibility. \
\
According to the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, speakers of different languages actually think \
differently because of the structure of their languages; in other words, language influences \
how we think. Support for this hypothesis is mixed. \
\
C. DYSLEXIA \
\
Dyslexia refers to difficulties in reading, or a reading disorder. People with dyslexia have \
difficulty matching speech sounds with written words. The prevalence rates for dyslexia \
range from three to 20% of the school population. Dyslexia seems to be equally common \
among boys and girls. Dyslexia may have a genetic component, and tends to be more \
common in children from lower SES, and from larger families. \
\
There are different types of dyslexia, some of which include deep dyslexia, surface \
dyslexia, phonological dyslexia, and neglect. \
\
\
\
                               Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
>DEEP DYSLEXIA A person with deep dyslexia mistakenly reads a given word as one \
with a similar meaning. For example, a person reads coat instead of jacket. \
\
>SURFACE DYSLEXIA In surface dyslexia, the person cannot recognize words, and \
instead, sounds them out. Therefore, irregular words, such as "come," are mispronounced. \
(Come is an irregular word because it is pronounced differently than other words that are \
spelled in a similar fashion, such as dome or home.) \
\
>PHONOLOGICAL DYSLEXIA    In phonological dyslexia, the person cannot read \
non-words aloud; otherwise, reading might be near perfect. For example, the person cannot \
read "squiflish." \
\
>NEGLECT Neglect involves misreading of the first or last half of a word. For example \
a person reads "slap" as "slit." \
\
II. DEVELOPMENT OF COGNITION \
\
Cognitive psychologists view people as active, growing beings, and as doers who actively \
construct their world. The two predominant theories of cognitive development are Piaget's \
stage theory and the information processing approach, described below. This section \
concludes with a brief focus on adolescent thinking. \
\
A. PIAGET'S STAGE THEORY \
\
Jean Piaget concentrated on the intensive study of relatively few children, sometimes called \
an idiographic approach. Piaget proposed that children have an innate capacity for \
adapting to the environment. He demonstrated that the child's intellect is fundamentally \
different from the adult's, and that people progress through distinct specific stages in \
cognitive and intellectual development. \
\
His theory of genetic epistemology proposes that we possess innate, genetic intellectual \
capabilities that make growth of abstract thought possible. Central to his theory is \
epigenesis, which holds that growth and development occur in a series of stages, each of \
which is built on the successful mastery of the previous stage. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
 A1. BASIC PRINCIPLES \
\
Piaget stated that cognitive development takes place as a result of three interconnected \
principles: organization, adaptation, and equilibration. \
\
>ORGANIZATION   Organization refers to the development of increasingly complex \
systems of knowledge. Piaget proposed that children and adults organize their knowledge \
as mental representations of reality, in order to help make sense of their experiences. \
Within these mental representations are cognitive structures called schemata, which are \
organized patterns of behavior that people use as a guide for thinking about or acting in a \
particular situation. For example, babies initially have independent schemas for looking \
and grasping. As babies mature they integrate the separate schemas into a single schema \
that allows for looking at an object while holding it. \
\
>ADAPTATION    Piaget defined adaptation as the way a person deals with new \
information. Adaptation involves changes to the individual's schemata to enhance the \
ability to survive, and it occurs through two complementary processes: assimilation and \
accommodation. Assimilation and accommodation work together to produce cognitive \
growth. \
\
     ASSIMILATION Assimilation is the process of taking in a new experience and \
     incorporating it into existing cognitive structures. For example, when a child sees \
     an eagle for the first time and calls it a "bird," the child is assimilating a new \
     experience (eagle) into an existing schema (birds). When the child sees an airplane \
     and also calls it a "bird," the child is once again assimilating but this time, the child \
     is making a mistake by doing so. \
\
     ACCOMMODATION Accommodation involves adjusting to reality demands by \
     reorganizing or modifying the existing cognitive structure or schema. When the \
     child creates a new schema for eagles or planes, accommodation is occurring. \
\
>EQUILIBRATION Equilibration describes the need for and striving toward \
equilibrium, or balance between the person and the outside environment, as well as among \
the person's schemata. This need for equilibrium helps determine the extent to which the \
child uses assimilation or accommodation to organize experiences. For example, if a child \
cannot understand a new situation using current schemata, the child will move toward \
accommodation, develop new patterns, and thereby restore equilibrium. \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
A2. PIAGET'S FOUR STAGES \
\
Piaget's four stages leading up to the capacity for adult thought are sensorimotor, \
preoperational, concrete operational and formal operational. The rate at which different \
children move through the stages varies, and decalage, or unevenness within a given \
child's cognitive development, is a common occurrence. \
\
>THE SENSORIMOTOR STAGE   The sensorimotor stage corresponds to birth until \
the time of significant language acquisition-typically age two. In this stage, infants learn \
through sensory observation and gain control of their motor functions through activity. \
exploration, and manipulation of the environment. The spatial, visual, and tactile world of \
the infant expands during this period, and the child actively interacts with the environment \
using previously learned behavior patterns. \
\
     OBJECT PERMANENCE The critical accomplishment during the sensorimotor \
     stage, which occurs sometime after three to four months (some say as late as eight \
     months), is the development of object permanence-the ability to understand that \
     objects continue to exist independent of the child's involvement with them. Infants \
     become able to maintain a mental image (representation) even when the object is \
     not present. This enhanced capacity has been used to explain the development of \
     separation protest and stranger anxiety. \
\
     SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION With the emergence of language near the end \
     of the sensorimotor stage, the child becomes more capable of symbolic \
     representation. \
\
>THE PREOPERATIONAL STAGE   The stage of preoperational thought, from age \
two to seven, is characterized by increased use of symbols and language far beyond the \
sensorimotor period. \
\
     INTUITIVE THINKING   During the preoperational stage, thinking and \
     reasoning are intuitive, that is, children are unable to think logically and \
     deductively. \
\
     EGOCENTRISM During this phase children are egocentric, and unable to take \
     the perspective of another person. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
     PHENOMENALISTIC CAUSALITY Preoperational children employ a type of \
     magical thinking called phenomenalistic causality in which events that occur \
     together are thought to cause one another. \
\
     ANIMISM Preoperational children demonstrate animistic thinking, by which they \
     endow inanimate objects with psychological attributes such as feelings or \
     intentions. \
\
     IRREVERSIBILITY Irreversibility refers to the inability to mentally undo \
     something. For example, if a ball of clay is rolled into the shape of a log, the \
     preoperational child cannot imagine returning it to its original ball shape. \
\
     CENTRATION Centration is the tendency to focus on one aspect of a problem at \
     a time. For example, the preoperational child will identify two rows of identical \
     objects as the same, but if the objects in one of the rows are more spread out, the \
     child will say the longer row has more objects. In another example, a young child \
     may have trouble understanding that his mother is both a mother to him and a sister \
     to his aunt. From the child's point of view, the woman must either be a mother or \
     a sister but can't be both. \
\
>THE CONCRETE OPERATIONAL STAGE     The stage of concrete operations, \
spanning seven to eleven years, is so named because the child can operate and act on real \
or imagined concrete objects. \
\
     OPERATIONAL THOUGHT During this stage, egocentric thought is replaced \
     with operational thought, which permits attending to a wide array of information. \
     Children can now use logical thought processes, and can serialize, or place objects \
     in order according to one or more dimensions (e.g., weight, color, etc.). Children \
     are able to reason and follow rules and regulations. \
\
     CONSERVATION   During the concrete operational stage, children develop \
     conservation, the ability to recognize that even though shape and form might \
     change, the objects still conserve other characteristics. \
\
>THE FORMAL OPERATIONAL STAGE The stage of formal operations, from age \
eleven through the end of adolescence, is characterized by the ability to apply operations \
to abstract concepts in addition to concrete objects. Adolescents become capable of \
hypothetical thinking ("What if?") and deductive reasoning ("If . .. then"). (Deductive \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
reasoning involves reasoning based on facts and is the basis for computer programs. \
Inductive reasoning is something uniquely human and involves the ability to generalize.) \
During the formal operational stage, individuals acquire the abstract reasoning skills to \
comprehend algebra, which involves manipulating symbols. \
\
     METACOGNITION During the formal operational stage, adolescents develop \
     metacognitive capacities, the ability to think about their thinking, and to explore \
     personal values and compare them with others. Not all adolescents enter this stage \
     at the same time. In fact, some people never enter this stage, but remain in the \
     concrete operational stage throughout their lives. \
\
Although Piaget has been subjected to many criticisms, his descriptions and observations \
of cognitive development have generally been confirmed. A key criticism is based on the \
finding that performance is sensitive to contextual influences. When tasks are simplified. \
or more familiar material is used, children perform better. Thus, some argue that Piaget has \
underestimated children's abilities at certain ages. Piaget also did not sufficiently address \
cultural and educational influences on cognitive development. \
\
An important concept associated with Piaget is constructivism. According to \
constructivism, a person develops new knowledge based on the foundation of previous \
learning, and by interacting with objects and events in the environment. When applied to \
schooling, constructivists place emphasis on the student, rather than the teacher. The \
teacher is a facilitator who assists students to construct their own conceptualizations and \
solutions to problems. \
\
In terms of cognitive development, Piaget believed that peers are highly influential in the \
child's cognitive development. Through interaction with peers, the child is confronted with \
different worldviews and comes to recognize that his or her view of the world may not be \
viable (e.g., may be egocentric, illogical). Parents, on the other hand, may be too \
cognitively advanced and therefore too intellectually removed from the child to play as \
significant of a role. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
B. VYGOTSKY'S SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT THEORY OF \
COGNITION \
\
According to Vygotsky, cognitive development results from social interaction. All higher \
cognitive functions, such as language, thinking, and memory, begin within the relationships \
the child has with others, and are later internalized. For example, a young child tends to \
narrate what he or she is doing (e.g., "I'm putting the books on the shelf and then I'm going \
to eat ice cream.") While Piaget would view this as egocentric speech, Vygotsky would \
consider this a necessary step in the child's development of the capacity to internalize \
thoughts. Unlike Piaget, Vygotsky believed that development was too complex to be \
divided into stages. Although both theorists recognized the role of peers in a child's \
learning, Vygotsky emphasized the influence of adults more than Piaget did. \
\
Vygotsky defined the zone of proximal development as the distance between what the \
child can do independently and what the child can do with adult guidance or peer \
collaboration. For example, a three-year-old girl can dress herself if she does it along with \
her older sister, but she cannot do it all by herself. According to Vygotsky, instruction \
should be targeted toward this zone, i.e., toward a developmental level just above the \
child's current developmental level. \
\
Social development theory has led to the instructional strategies of scaffolding and \
reciprocal teaching. In scaffolding, teachers adjust their level of help based on the child's \
performance. For example, the teacher may talk the child through a task (e.g., carrying \
numbers in math addition problems), until the child is able to complete the task \
independently. Then the teacher withdraws the assistance. Reciprocal teaching involves \
a dialogue between the teacher and students. For example, they may discuss various \
problem-solving strategies for math problems rather than the teacher presenting the \
"correct" strategy. \
\
C. INFORMATION PROCESSING \
\
The information processing approach is a newer model that views cognitive development \
as distinctly different from Piaget's views. Piaget's theory is a stage theory that focuses on \
qualitative differences that occur at different stages. By contrast, information processing \
focuses on quantitative changes that occur more smoothly, continuously and gradually over \
the life span. \
\
\
\
                               Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
Differences in cognitive abilities across different age groups are explained on the basis of \
differences in experience and knowledge. For example, it has been found that two-year- \
olds can typically repeat only two digits, four-year olds can repeat three or four digits, and \
ten-year-olds can repeat about six digits. Information processing theory proposes that this \
improvement in memory results from a gradual, more effective use of memory strategies, \
such as rehearsal (repeating information over and over) and mnemonics (rules such as 'i' \
before 'e' except after 'c'), as the child ages. \
\
Preschoolers have a limited attention span, limited short-term memory capacity, use \
unsystematic approaches to solve problems, and frequently don't focus on the most \
relevant aspects of a problem. By contrast, adolescents have more knowledge gained \
through experience, and this knowledge influences learning strategies and efficiency. \
Adolescents are better able to distill the critical features of a new problem and recognize \
how a new problem resembles older, familiar problems (an isomorph). More experienced \
problem solvers may be better able to withstand the confusion of new vocabulary, \
unfamiliar subjects or new ideas, and to place the problem in the context of what they \
know, called "transfer processing." \
\
Information processing theory sees enhanced cognitive capacities of adolescents as \
resulting from a larger foundation of information, better skills in discerning isomorphs, \
more thorough scanning, flexible use of learning strategies, and enhanced abilities to self- \
monitor. \
\
D. ADOLESCENT THINKING \
\
Adolescent thinking presents contradictions and complexities. According to Elkind, \
although adolescents are capable of sophisticated problem solving, their thinking can also \
be rather immature, as a result of inexperience with abstract thought. Elkind has delineated \
several attitudes and behaviors typical of adolescents. These include finding fault with \
persons in authority, argumentativeness, indecisiveness, hypocrisy (not living up to values \
espoused by the adolescent), self-consciousness, and a sense of invulnerability. \
\
>PERSONAL FABLE   The term personal fable refers to adolescents' beliefs that they \
are somehow special, and that rules of conduct do not apply to them. Based on this belief, \
many adolescents think that they are invulnerable. It is not uncommon for adolescents to \
believe that they can use drugs without any negative consequences or engage in \
unprotected sex without becoming pregnant or contracting diseases. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
>IMAGINARY AUDIENCE    Adolescents often operate under the assumption that \
everyone is thinking about the same thing that they are thinking about, specifically, \
themselves. Early adolescent thinking is commonly characterized by extreme self- \
consciousness. This self-consciousness frequently involves an imaginary audience. An \
imaginary audience is a person or group of people perceived as closely observing the \
adolescent, when in fact they are not. The adolescent believes that these people are as \
concerned with the adolescent's appearance or behavior as she or he is. \
\
E. COGNITIVE CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH AGING \
\
Cognitive abilities do not globally decrease as people age; some abilities remain intact, or \
even improve, while others slowly worsen. Intellectual capacities are broadly divided into \
two categories, crystallized intelligence and fluid intelligence. \
\
>CRYSTALLIZED INTELLIGENCE Crystallized intelligence refers to practiced and \
overlearned skills that are predominantly verbal. Crystallized intelligence appears to \
remain intact with aging and may even improve overall. On the WAIS-IV, older adults find \
Vocabulary, Information, and Comprehension the easiest of the subtests, and scores on \
these subtests may only begin to show a decline in the 70s. Some verbal abilities, such as \
word knowledge and naming skills, show minimal declines. In contrast, speech \
comprehension and fluency generally decrease. \
\
>FLUID INTELLIGENCE Fluid intelligence refers to capacities for problem solving \
in novel situations. Fluid intelligence is believed to peak in adolescence and thereafter \
gradually decline. On the WAIS-IV, the performance subtests are therefore experienced as \
the most difficult, with subtest scores beginning to decline in the 30s or 40s. \
\
The classic aging pattern therefore involves a decline in performance skills with verbal \
skills remaining intact. Previously, this pattern was thought to reflect differences in \
crystallized versus fluid abilities. However, since cognitive speed clearly declines with age, \
this slowing may better explain the discrepancy between verbal and performance subtest \
scores. Some hypothesize that an overall slowing in the central nervous system causes the \
decrease in processing speed. Decreases in visual acuity and auditory sensitivity may \
further account for diminished cognitive performance. \
\
Among older adults, there is a general trend in the direction of better performance when \
the person is dealing with familiar and/or simple stimuli, and by contrast, impairment when \
dealing with unfamiliar, novel, and/or complex stimuli. Overall, older adults tend to show \
\
\
\
                               Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
decreased abilities in complex attentional tasks, certain higher-order cognitive processes, \
and some aspects of memory. \
\
>ATTENTION   In the area of attention, older adults tend to do well on simple tasks but \
show problems with more complex tasks, such as ones that require attention to more than \
one source of information. \
\
>HIGHER-ORDER COGNITIVE PROCESSES   In terms of higher-order cognitive \
processes such as problem-solving, reasoning, conceptualization, and planning, older \
adults don't do as well as younger adults when tested in laboratory-like situations. \
Interestingly, older adults do as well as, or even outperform, younger adults when these \
same processes are assessed in terms of everyday, real-world functioning (ecologically- \
based evaluation). \
\
>MEMORY    While some aspects of memory functioning appear to remain intact, others \
seem to decline with age. Short-term memory is thought to consist of two components: \
primary memory and working memory. \
\
     PRIMARY MEMORY Primary memory is a passive "holding tank" for small \
     amounts of information requiring no manipulation (e.g., remember five digits in \
     sequence). Primary memory is thought to remain intact in older adults. \
\
     WORKING MEMORY By contrast, working memory briefly holds and \
     manipulates information (e.g., repeating the five digits in reverse order). Working \
     memory is thought to decline with age. \
\
In terms of long-term memory, episodic memory (e.g., what you had for breakfast or did \
you remember to lock your car) shows the most decline with age. In contrast, both semantic \
memory (knowledge or facts and meanings) and procedural memory (memory for motor \
skills) remain intact with age. \
\
It is hypothesized that memory problems associated with older adulthood are due to \
problems with both encoding and retrieval, with retrieval problems being more significant. \
In general, older adults seem less efficient and less precise in encoding new information. \
Older adults also have significantly more trouble with recall as compared with recognition \
(recall puts more demands on the retrieval system than recognition does). Tasks requiring \
recall of word lists, prose passages, and word pairs, all tend to be difficult for older adults. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
Once again, older adults do not show as much impairment on real-world tasks of recall as \
they do on laboratory tests. \
\
Possible physiological explanations for the decline in memory over the lifespan include \
atrophy of the hippocampus, decreasing activity of certain neurotransmitters (including \
acetylcholine, serotonin, and the catecholamines), and the toxic effects of endogenous \
amino acids. \
\
III. MORAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
Three important contributors to theories on moral development are Piaget, Kohlberg, and \
Gilligan. \
\
A. PIAGET'S THEORY OF MORAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
According to Piaget, moral development is linked to cognitive development. Piaget \
asserted that children make sounder moral judgments when they possess the cognitive \
ability of being able to see things from more than one perspective. \
\
Piaget asserted that moral reasoning develops in two stages: the morality of constraint \
stage, and the morality of cooperation stage. \
\
>HETERONOMOUS MORALITY    In this first stage (ages five to ten), the morality of \
constraint dominates. Young, egocentric children think rigidly about morality; children \
cannot imagine more than one way of looking at a moral issue. In this stage, children \
believe that rules are decided upon by authority figures, cannot be changed, must be \
followed without question, and that any offense deserves punishment (unless they are the \
offenders). \
\
>AUTONOMOUS MORALITY     In the second stage, which occurs at about age ten, \
the morality of cooperation is evident. This stage is characterized by flexibility. By this \
point in time, children have had the opportunity to interact with many people and have \
experienced a wide range of viewpoints. They realize that there is not one unchangeable \
standard of right and wrong. In this stage children can consider more than one aspect of \
the situation and can consider the intent behind behavior. Children come to realize that \
rules are flexible, are agreed upon by others, and can be changed if necessary. \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
B. KOHLBERG'S THEORY OF MORAL REASONING \
\
Like Piaget, Kohlberg asserted that how people think about moral issues reflects cognitive \
development. Kohlberg further proposed that people arrive at moral judgments on their \
own, rather than by internalizing parental or societal standards. \
\
Kohlberg's theory of moral development involves three general stages, each of which is \
subdivided into two substages, for a total of six substages of moral development. \
\
>PRECONVENTIONAL MORALITY    Preconventional morality (from ages four to \
ten) emphasizes compliance with rules to avoid punishment and get rewards. At this stage, \
moral judgment is self-centered, and people act out of self-interest. The two substages are \
the Punishment-Obedience Orientation (Stage 1), with a focus on avoiding punishment, \
and Instrumental Hedonism (Stage 2), involving obedience to rules with the hope that good \
deeds will be rewarded. \
\
>CONVENTIONAL MORALITY Conventional morality (typically reached after age \
ten) emphasizes conforming to rules to get approval from others. At this stage, standards \
of those in authority have been internalized, and people want to be considered "good." \
Moral reasoning advances from being self-centered to other-centered. The two substages \
are the Good Boy/Good Girl orientation (Stage 3), with a concern for gaining approval \
through obedience, and the Law and Order orientation (Stage 4), with a focus on doing \
one's duty, and maintaining social order. \
\
>POSTCONVENTIONAL    MORALITY (MORALITY    OF AUTONOMOUS \
MORAL PRINCIPLES) Postconventional morality (which can begin by age 13, in \
young adulthood, or never) involves recognition that there are sometimes conflicts between \
moral or socially accepted standards. In this stage, the person makes moral decisions based \
on what is right, fair, or just. Morality of Contract, Individual Rights, and Democratically \
Accepted Laws (Stage 5) emphasizes valuing the will of the majority, and the welfare of \
society. Morality of Individual Principles of Conscience (Stage 6) is a morality based on \
what the individual believes is right, regardless of legal restrictions or opinions of others. \
People in this stage act in accordance with internalized standards. \
\
Kohlberg's work has been criticized as lacking cultural sensitivity and being biased toward \
a Western individualistic view, in that the highest stage of morality places individual \
conscience over societal demands and norms. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
C. CAROL GILLIGAN \
\
Kohlberg's original studies were conducted with boys and men only. Carol Gilligan has \
criticized Kohlberg's theory for giving a higher moral place to traditional male values (e.g., \
justice and fairness) than to traditional female values (e.g., compassion and caring). \
\
Gilligan has suggested that there are two basic approaches to moral reasoning: the justice \
perspective and the caring perspective. \
\
>JUSTICE PERSPECTIVE Gilligan proposed that males generally prefer the justice \
perspective, which emphasizes fairness. \
\
>CARING PERSPECTIVE Gilligan asserted that the central moral dilemma faced by \
women is the conflict between their own needs and those of others. Based on her research, \
Gilligan concluded that women think less about abstract justice and fairness than men do, \
and think more about their responsibilities to specific people. \
\
Gilligan developed a three-level model of moral development for women. \
\
     LEVEL 1: ORIENTATION OF INDIVIDUAL SURVIVAL At this level the \
     woman concentrates only on what is best for her. \
\
     LEVEL 2: GOODNESS AS SELF-SACRIFICE At this level the woman \
     sacrifices her own wishes to meet others' wants and needs. What others think of \
     her is central to moral reasoning at this point. \
\
     LEVEL 3: MORALITY OF NONVIOLENCE The woman believes that no one \
     should be hurt (including herself), and she is thus able to experience moral equality \
     between herself and others, which then affects her decision-making. \
\
Large-scale follow-up research has found no differences between men and women in their \
responses to Kohlberg's dilemmas. \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
D. RESEARCH FINDINGS ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF \
CONSCIENCE \
\
Kochanska and associates have demonstrated that the development of conscience in young \
children is related to early temperament as well as parenting styles. Specifically, \
Kochanska found that the development of conscience in later childhood was positively \
correlated with high inhibitory control and low impulsivity in early childhood. The \
development of conscience has also been linked to a parenting style that involves mutual \
positive affect between mother and child, low power assertion by the mother, and maternal \
empathy. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
      8.4 PSYCHOSOCIAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
This section focuses on psychosocial development throughout the lifespan. It begins with \
a discussion of personality development. This is followed by descriptions of social and \
emotional development. \
\
I. PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT \
\
A. FREUD AND ERIKSON \
\
Freud's theory of development, which focused on childhood, was organized around his \
libido theory. According to Freud, childhood phases of development correspond to \
successive shifts in the investment of sexual energy to areas of the body associated with \
eroticism. He distinguished between the oral phase (birth to one year), the anal phase (one \
to three) the phallic phase (three to five), latency (five or six to adolescence) and genital \
phase (adolescence through adulthood). \
\
Erik Erikson accepted Freud's theory of infantile sexuality but also saw developmental \
potentials at all stages of life. He constructed a model of the life cycle consisting of eight \
stages, extending into old age. Erikson proposed that successful negotiation of each \
development task results in specific strengths. \
\
Age       Freud     Erikson                     Erikson \
\
                    Psychosocial Crisis         Strength \
 Ist year Oral      trust vs. mistrust           Hope \
 1-3      Anal      autonomy vs. shame and doubt Will \
3 - 5/6   Phallic   initiative vs. guilt         Purpose \
5/6-12    Latency   industry vs. inferiority     Competence \
 12-18    Genital   identity vs. role confusion Fidelity \
 18 - 35            intimacy vs. isolation       Love \
35 - 60             generativity vs. stagnation Care \
60+                 integrity vs. despair        Wisdom \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
B. MARGARET MAHLER \
\
Mahler developed a theory that describes the processes of separation and individuation. \
Mahler described six stages of development. These include normal infantile autism, \
symbiosis, differentiation, practicing, rapprochement, and object constancy. \
\
Separation is the process of becoming a discrete physical entity by physically distancing, \
while individuation is the process of becoming a psychologically independent person, \
which involves maturation of independent ego functions. \
\
>NORMAL INFANTILE AUTISM In normal infantile autism (1st month), the baby is \
unaware of the external world. Research has not supported Mahler's conception and has \
rather demonstrated that the newborn is much more aware of the environment than had \
previously been believed. \
\
>SYMBIOSIS In symbiosis (2 - 4 months), the baby feels that she and the mother are \
one, rather than separate entities. \
\
>DIFFERENTIATION During the differentiation stage (5 -10 months), the child is able \
to distinguish between self and other objects, which ushers in stranger anxiety, as the \
child is increasingly aware of the unfamiliar. \
\
>PRACTICING During the practicing period (10 - 16 months), the child discovers the \
ability to physically separate the self from the mother. During this period the child initially \
crawls, and then moves on to free, upright locomotion, which paradoxically creates \
separation anxiety. \
\
>RAPPROCHEMENT During rapprochement (16 - 24 months), there is increased need \
for the mother to share the child's new skills and experiences, and a great need for love. \
\
>OBJECT CONSTANCY Object constancy (2 - 3 years), which begins at the age of two \
or three, is the ability to maintain the image of the mother when she is not present, as well \
as to unify the good and bad into a whole representation. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
C. LEVINSON \
\
According to Levinson's Seasons of a Man's Life theory (1978), development proceeds \
through alternating periods of transition and stability. Levinson based his theory on \
interviews with 40 men who held professional jobs. This theory has been criticized both \
for excluding persons of lower socioeconomic status, and for excluding women and their \
development. In this theory, the role assigned to the woman is that of fulfilling her \
husband's dreams. Levinson proposed that when the woman is no longer needed by her \
husband and children, she can begin to form her identity. \
\
>EARLY ADULT TRANSITION During the early adult transition (17 - 22), the person \
starts to change the sense of self developed during childhood and begins to make some \
tentative choices about life as an adult. \
\
>ENTERING THE ADULT WORLD During the phase of entering the adult world (22 \
- 28), the person consolidates choices made earlier about career, social relationships, \
values, and lifestyle. \
\
>AGE 30 TRANSITION The age 30 transition (28 - 33) involves establishing patterns \
of adult life, which may include a reconsideration of choices made before. The person may \
feel as if there is little time left to establish one's life, which may make this a very stressful \
period. \
\
>SETTLING DOWN   During the settling down phase (33 - 40), the person has settled \
into commitments as an adult, often assuming more responsibilities and establishing \
routines. \
\
>MID-LIFE TRANSITION The mid-life transition (40 - 45) phase involves a change \
in perspective from "time since birth" to "time left to live." This period sometimes involves \
crises, possibly leading to significant changes (e.g., divorce, career change). \
\
>MIDDLE ADULTHOOD    During middle adulthood (45 - 50) the person begins to \
relinquish the perspective of early adulthood and may make major adjustments as a result \
of this change in perspective, including planning for the future (e.g., retirement). \
\
>AGE 50 TRANSITION Age 50 transition involves making changes associated with \
entering this decade of life. \
\
\
\
                               Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
>LATE ADULTHOOD    In the stage of late adulthood the person typically reflects on \
life and decisions made. It involves the developmental tasks associated with this stage of \
life, such as retirement, death, etc. \
\
II. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
This section highlights significant areas in social development, including attachment, \
parenting, gender role development, social interaction, issues in education, adolescent \
development, and social issues in late adulthood. \
\
A. ATTACHMENT \
\
Researchers have studied attachment behaviors in nonhuman primates (e.g., Lorenz and \
Harlow), as well as in human infants (e.g., Bowlby and Ainsworth). In humans, attachment \
appears to be an active, reciprocal, enduring relationship. \
\
>KONRAD LORENZ   Ethological studies show that nonhuman primates demonstrate \
attachment behavior patterns that are presumed to be instinctual. An example of this is \
imprinting, in which certain stimuli are capable of eliciting innate behavior patterns during \
a critical period of the animal's development. For example, Lorenz found that goslings that \
had imprinted on him between 12 and 17 hours after birth continued to follow him even \
when other geese later became available as models. \
\
>HARRY HARLOW Experiments by Harlow in the 1950s studied monkeys reared with \
wire surrogate mothers and terry cloth surrogate mothers. The monkeys preferred and spent \
more time clinging to the terry cloth surrogates, even if the feeding was done by the wire \
mothers. When frightened, the monkeys ran to the terry cloth mothers for security. Harlow \
described this as contact comfort, and highlighted the importance of pleasurable tactile \
sensations as a contributor to attachment behavior. Contact comfort appears to be equally \
if not more important between human mothers and infants. \
\
Harlow also found that monkeys placed in isolation during the first few months of life \
showed abnormal and autistic-like social and sexual behaviors. When placed with normally \
reared younger monkeys, there was a significant but not complete remission of pathology. \
\
>JOHN BOWLBY   John Bowlby formulated attachment theory, and proposed that \
attachment is crucial to healthy development. Bowlby suggested a Darwinian evolutionary \
basis for attachment behavior, in that it ensures that adults protect their helpless young. He \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
proposed that newborns are biologically equipped with both verbal and nonverbal \
behaviors (e.g., crying, clinging, smiling) that function to elicit instinctive nurturing \
responses from the caretaker. \
\
Bowlby described a syndrome of maternal deprivation that occurs in some children under \
two years old who are placed in institutions and separated from their mothers for extended \
periods of time (e.g., over three months). Bowlby described a predictable sequence of \
behavior that includes protest, despair, and detachment. \
\
     PROTEST When separated initially, the child protests by crying, calling out, and \
     searching for the lost person. \
\
     DESPAIR As the period of separation continues, the child shows signs of feeling \
     hopeless that the mother will ever return. \
\
     DETACHMENT During this final step, the child emotionally separates the self \
     from the mother. In the detachment phase the child responds in an indifferent \
     manner when the mother returns. \
\
The effect of deprivation of maternal attention is also described by Ren\'e9 Spitz, who coined \
the term anaclytic depression to describe the syndrome of weepiness, withdrawal, \
insomnia, decline of health and affect found in babies deprived of maternal attention \
somewhere between six and eight months of age. \
\
>MARY AINSWORTH     The attachment relationship between infant and caregiver \
begins at birth and becomes increasingly important in the second half of the first year, \
corresponding to the time of development of stranger and separation anxiety. By the time \
the infant is one year old, the quality of the attachment relationship can be measured using \
the Strange Situation Procedure in the laboratory. This procedure looks at how infants \
organize their behavior around the attachment figure when they are mildly stressed in a \
strange room by encountering an unfamiliar adult and then being left briefly by the \
attachment figure. \
\
Ainsworth (1978) has delineated three different levels of attachment: secure attachment, \
avoidant attachment, and ambivalent or resistant attachment. Future research (e.g., Main \
and Solomon) identified a fourth pattern- disorganized-disoriented attachment. \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
     SECURE ATTACHMENT Securely attached babies (about 65% of all babies) \
     are warm and responsive. When exposed to the stranger, these infants seek \
     closeness and contact with the mother, may show moderate distress upon \
     separation, and greet the mother with enthusiasm when she returns. It is \
     hypothesized that a parenting style of sensitive and responsive caregiving is \
     associated with secure attachment. \
\
     AVOIDANT ATTACHMENT Avoidant babies (approximately 20% of babies) \
     do not seek closeness and contact with the mother, treat the mother like a stranger. \
     rarely cry when she leaves the room, and ignore her on her return. They may even \
     prefer the stranger over the mother. It is believed that a caregiving style of aloofness \
     and distance, or intrusiveness and overstimulation is associated with avoidant \
     attachment. \
\
     AMBIVALENT (RESISTANT) ATTACHMENT   Ambivalent babies (about \
     10% of babies) are clingy and become upset when the mother leaves the room. \
     When the mother returns, the babies are happy and reestablish contact, but they \
     show their ambivalence by then resisting the mother's comforting behaviors. They \
     may cry, kick, or squirm to get away. Ambivalent babies do little exploring and \
     appear angry toward both the mother and the stranger. Caregivers of ambivalent \
     babies have been characterized as inconsistent and insensitive. \
\
     DISORGANIZED-DISORIENTED ATTACHMENT    Infants who have a \
     disorganized-disoriented attachment exhibit no clear strategy in dealing with the \
     mother. They may be unresponsive when the mother returns. At times, they may \
     avoid and resist the mother. At other times, they may freeze and stop moving when \
     the mother comes near. The most striking characteristic of these infants is that they \
     exhibit fear and confusion toward their mothers. The disorganized-disoriented \
     attachment is believed to be the least secure pattern of attachment, and is commonly \
     associated with abuse of the infant, or unresolved abuse issues of the caretaker. \
\
Research has demonstrated that infants classified as securely versus insecurely attached at \
12 and 18 months differ emotionally and behaviorally in preschool and during the school- \
age years. The construct of level of attachment appears fairly reliable and valid. Age two \
is a time when toddlers develop a stronger sense of their own self-efficacy. Those who are \
securely attached show more competent autonomous function. Additionally, in day care, \
securely attached toddlers are neither victims nor victimizers, while insecurely attached \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
children do assume these roles. Some theorists argue that the varying patterns of attachment \
reflect the temperament of the child, and not the quality of the mother-child relationship. \
\
B. PARENTING \
\
>PATTERNS OF PARENTING   Much socialization occurs within the context of the \
parent-child relationship. Baumrind (1971) has identified three major patterns of parenting. \
\
     AUTHORITARIAN PARENTS    Authoritarian parents expect unquestioned \
     obedience, are demanding, controlling, threatening and punishing. Authoritarian \
     parents tend to be more detached and less warm than other parents. Children \
     exposed to this parenting style are frequently moody, irritable, discontented, \
     withdrawn, distrustful, and aggressive and tend to have more behavior disorders. In \
     Baumrind's earliest research, this parenting style was termed "conflicted-irritable" \
     and led to children who were also termed "conflicted-irritable." \
\
     PERMISSIVE PARENTS Permissive parents value self-expression and self- \
     regulation. Permissive parents are either permissive-indifferent or permissive- \
     indulgent. Permissive-indifferent parents set few limits, provide little monitoring, \
     and are generally detached and uninvolved. Their children have poor self-control, \
     are demanding, minimally compliant, and have poor interpersonal skills. \
     Permissive-indulgent parents are loving and emotionally available, yet set few \
     limits, demands or controls. Their children tend to be impulsive, immature and out \
     of control. In Baumrind's earliest research, the permissive-indulgent parenting style \
     was termed "impulsive" and led to children who were termed "impulsive- \
     aggressive." \
\
     AUTHORITATIVE PARENTS Authoritative parents are caring and emotionally \
     available, yet firm, fair and reasonable. They set appropriate limits and provide \
     structure and reasonable expectations. Children with authoritative parents are \
     usually competent, confident, independent, cooperative and at ease in social \
     situations. In Baumrind's earliest research, this parenting style was termed \
     "energetic-friendly" and led to children who were termed "energetic-friendly-self- \
     reliant." \
\
One criticism of Baumrind's research is that parenting style may actually be a reaction by \
the parent to the child's innate temperament rather than an influence on the child's \
behavior. \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
Cross-cultural research has indicated that children's culturally influenced expectations of \
how a parent should behave affects the results of parenting styles (e.g., a Korean child will \
likely view an authoritarian parent as loving and concerned). Indeed, cross-cultural \
research has strongly suggested that the key variable that affects outcome is warmth versus \
rejection. Parental rejection and hostility, across cultures, are associated with more \
behavior problems, difficulty in interpersonal relationships, and psychological problems. \
\
>WORKING MOTHERS    There have been significant inconsistencies in the research \
on the effects of working mothers and the impact of day care on childhood development. \
Few clear-cut conclusions have emerged. This seems to be largely due to the fact that there \
are wide differences in quality across day care settings, as well significant variations in the \
quality of caregiving at home. \
\
One general finding is that children of working mothers tend to have more egalitarian views \
of sex roles than children of stay-at-home mothers. In terms of cognitive development, \
there is some evidence that middle class boys in daycare have slightly lower academic \
performance than middle class boys whose mothers do not work. However, lower class boys \
placed in daycare seem to do better academically than lower class boys who are raised at \
home. In terms of emotional development, a large study found no dangers to healthy \
attachment even in infants entering day care before three months. In terms of social \
development, the findings appear mixed, in that children who experienced day care tend to be \
more sociable, self-confident and persistent, yet they have also been found to be more \
disobedient, less polite, bossier and more aggressive with other children. \
\
In the U.S., while fathers are more involved in carrying out childcare responsibilities, \
mothers perform the majority of childcare. \
\
>GAY AND LESBIAN PARENTS The research on gay and lesbian parents has shown \
that children of these parents are as well adjusted as children of heterosexual parents. \
Furthermore, these children show equivalent rates of homosexuality as in the general \
population (some say 5% - 10%). \
\
>SINGLE PARENTS With regard to effects on children of single parent homes, the \
most consistent finding is lower levels of achievement. This is largely thought to be due to \
the effects of low family income, or poverty. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
C. GENDER ROLE DEVELOPMENT \
\
While sex refers to the biological status of being either male or female, which is determined \
at conception, gender refers to the cultural and individual meanings that are attached to the \
status of being male or female. \
\
>STAGES OF GENDER ROLE DEVELOPMENT \
\
     GENDER ROLES Gender roles refer to the societal expectations for appropriate \
     male or female behavior. Gender roles begin to develop virtually from birth and \
     develop throughout life. \
\
     GENDER IDENTITY   Gender identity refers to the individual's perception of \
     him or herself as a male or a female. At 18 months there is an emergence of the \
     objective self (facial recognition of the self in mirrors, photos, etc.), which paves \
     the way for the beginning of gender identity consolidation. Gender identity is \
     usually achieved by the age of three years at the latest (e.g., a three-year-old boy \
     knows he is a boy). \
\
     GENDER CONSTANCY    Gender constancy describes the attainment of the \
     recognition that gender does not change with dress or behavior (e.g., once a male, \
     always a male, even if wearing a dress). Gender constancy is attained by age five \
     or six. \
\
>THEORIES OF GENDER ROLE DEVELOPMENT \
\
Four major theories of gender role development have been proposed. These include social \
learning theory, cognitive-developmental theory, gender schema theory, and \
psychoanalytic theory. \
\
     SOCIAL-LEARNING THEORY   This theory contends that children acquire \
     their gender roles through the process of imitation and reinforcement. \
\
     COGNITIVE-DEVELOPMENTAL THEORY       Cognitive-developmental \
     theory considers the child's thinking process as the key force behind gender role \
     development. According to Kohlberg, children first develop a concept of gender \
     identity and then develop gender constancy. The cognitive attainment of gender \
     constancy motivates them to want to be "proper" girls and boys. Critics of this \
\
\
\
                               Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
     theory note that gender roles develop much before the age or five or six. For \
     example, children frequently show preferences for sex-appropriate toys within the \
     first two years of life. \
\
     GENDER-SCHEMA THEORY    Gender-schema theory is currently the most \
     accepted theory of gender role development. It suggests that children use gender as \
     a schema to organize their world. Gender-schema theory considers both social \
     learning and the child's cognitive processes as involved in gender role acquisition. \
     For example, a girl plays with dolls because she has observed other girls doing so, \
     and because her mother has rewarded her with praise. In addition, she has a \
     category for "girl," recognizes that she belongs to this category, and defines this \
     category, in part, by enjoyment of dolls. \
\
     PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORIES Psychoanalytic theories emphasize the role \
     of the Oedipus complex, in which the guilt and anxiety about sexual attraction to \
     the other-sex parent is resolved by identifying with the same-sex parent. The theory \
     argues that "biology is destiny." Differences in male-female genital structures \
     account for differences in behavior and personality. Most current gender role \
     theorists do not draw on psychoanalytic theories. \
\
D. DEVELOPMENT OF RACIAL AWARENESS \
\
The bulk of the research suggests that between the ages of three and four, children become \
aware of differences based on racial or ethnic background. By age four, children still do \
not fully understand racial differences, but they have begun to realize that color differences \
have social meaning. At this age, children also begin to exhibit a preference for same-race \
playmates. \
\
E. SOCIAL INTERACTION \
\
>PLAY Children's play has been categorized both in terms of the levels of social play \
(e.g., by looking at the nature of the interactions) and in terms of cognitive play (reflecting \
the level of cognitive development). \
\
Social play typically proceeds through four stages: solitary play, parallel play, associative \
play and cooperative play. Solitary and parallel play dominates through age two. Between \
ages two and three, children begin to engage in associative and cooperative play. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
     SOLITARY PLAY In this stage the child plays alone with toys that are different \
     from those of other children around him or her, and makes no effort to engage other \
     children in play. \
\
     PARALLEL PLAY In this type of play, the child plays independently but next \
     to other children, using toys similar to those being used by the other children. \
     However, the child plays beside, but not with, other children. \
\
     ASSOCIATIVE PLAY The child engaged in associative play interacts with other \
     children and shares toys. However, the child acts as he or she wishes, and does not \
     adopt any roles. \
\
     COOPERATIVE PLAY In this type of play, the child is part of a group that has \
     some common goal (e.g., to make something, to play a formal game, etc.). The \
     child takes on a role and supplements the effort of others in the group. \
\
Piaget has suggested that children progress through four levels of cognitive play: repetitive \
play, constructive play, imaginative play and formal games with rules. \
\
     REPETITIVE PLAY   Repetitive play involves simple, repetitive muscular \
     movements, such as rolling a ball. \
\
     CONSTRUCTIVE PLAY    Constructive play involves using materials to \
     construct or create something, such as building a tower with blocks. \
\
     IMAGINATIVE PLAY     Imaginative play involves fantasy and drama. \
     Imaginative play involves taking on pretend roles such as Batman, or playing \
     doctor. It is believed that imaginative play serves a crucial role in the early years of \
     allowing children to try out new roles and master difficult feelings. \
\
     FORMAL GAMES WITH RULES    The development and adherence to rules \
     while playing games varies with children's ages. Between the ages of four to seven. \
     rules fluctuate and are egocentrically motivated. From ages seven through eleven \
     rules are followed more carefully. By adolescence, rules of any game are seen as \
     absolute, and adolescents require that they be followed. \
\
>FRIENDSHIP During the preschool years, children play with same sex, as well as \
opposite sex peers. In latency, children tend to engage more in activities with same sex peers. \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
During childhood, girls tend to be more concerned with the quality of their friendships, while \
boys place more emphasis on the number of friends that they have. Factors that may account \
for a child's lack of popularity include an unattractive appearance, poor academic \
performance, and shyness. \
\
>DELINQUENCY AND AGGRESSION    Research has suggested that the nature of \
children's interaction with their parents tends to influence their social adjustment. One \
extensive study revealed that the nature of adolescents' relationships with parents was the \
single factor that best accounted for delinquency. This study further revealed that the \
incidence of delinquency among boys from unhappy, though intact homes is greater than \
among boys from "broken homes." It is possible that this may be related to the style of \
interaction with the father that may involve aggression, or the father may model aggressive \
behavior. \
\
According to Patterson's coercion model of aggression, three steps lead to delinquency. \
First, children learn to be aggressive by observing coercive and antisocial behavior in the \
parents. Such parents respond to a child's noncompliance with increasingly coercive and \
aggressive behaviors. Poor parenting practices then unwittingly reinforce coercive \
behavior on the part of the child. A cycle of escalating coerciveness ensues. The child's \
coercive behavior leads to conduct problems. Second, the child with conduct problems \
experiences academic failure and peer rejection. Third, the child then experiences a \
depressed mood and is more likely to join a deviant peer group. \
\
>BULLYING Experts do not view bullying as a normal part of childhood, but as a \
behavior that indicates serious potential problems both for the bully and the victim. \
According to research from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development \
(NICHD), 16% of students in the U.S. report being bullied during the current term. Girls \
tend to use and receive verbal or psychological bullying more than physical bullying. \
Although school is the site for the majority of bullying incidents, the most severe forms of \
bullying happen outside school where there is less adult protection. Intervention programs \
in the school have been shown to be effective in reducing bullying, sometimes by more \
than 50%. \
\
Overall, current research does not support the theory that bullies suffer from insecurity and \
low self-esteem. The NICHD found that those who bully are more likely to be involved in \
other violent behavior or may be involved in violent behavior in the future (e.g., carrying \
a weapon, fighting). Perry, a noted researcher in bullying, has similarly found that children \
who demonstrate chronic aggressive behavior before the age of eight are more likely to \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
exhibit criminal behavior as adults and to engage in family violence to a greater extent, \
including abuse of children. \
\
Interestingly, according the NICHD research, victims of bullying are themselves at risk for \
engaging in violent behaviors. In addition, they are more likely to suffer from depression \
and low self-esteem as adults. Perry identified several factors that predict that a child will \
be a victim of bullying. Two conditions make victimization most likely: exhibiting \
behaviors that encourage bullying (e.g., crying or submissiveness) and peer rejection. \
\
F. ISSUES IN EDUCATION \
\
>TEACHER EXPECTATIONS AND INTERACTIONS   Research by Rosenthal and \
colleagues has suggested that teachers' expectations have an impact on students' academic \
performance (Rosenthal effect). When teachers have high expectations of their students, \
students tend to perform better than when teachers expect little from them. \
\
Studies have also been conducted on the impact of students' gender on interactions with \
teachers. These studies have indicated that female and male teachers tend to have a greater \
degree of interaction with male students, though these interactions tend to be more critical \
or negative. This pattern holds true in preschool through college. Further, teachers of both \
sexes seem to more frequently praise females for effort and cooperation, while they praise \
males more often for ability and achievement. \
\
>COOPERATIVE LEARNING CLASSES In cooperative learning classes, students of \
different ability levels and cultural backgrounds work together, or cooperate, on \
completing assignments and projects. Research has demonstrated that these classes are \
beneficial for low-ability students in terms of improving their academic functioning. These \
classes may or may not help to improve the academic performance of high-ability students. \
Cooperative learning programs have also been found to effectively reduce cultural biases \
and stereotypes. \
\
>MONTESSORI SCHOOLS   The key principle underlying Montessori schools is that \
maximum learning comes from manipulation of materials (sensory-motor stimuli), rather than \
through traditional classroom instruction and rote learning. Children in Montessori schools \
are grouped with peers of different ages and abilities (e.g., 3- to 5-year-olds, 6- to 9-year-olds. \
and 10-year-olds and up), because it is believed that the older children can facilitate learning \
in the younger ones. Thus, children have different experiences over time of first being the \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
youngest, and then the oldest. Children are not pushed to excel, but rather are encouraged to \
perform at their potential, with learning goals that are individually tailored. \
\
G. ADOLESCENT ISSUES IN SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
>IDENTITY FORMATION    Adolescence is a significant time of life for identity \
formation. One researcher, James Marcia, has described four possible identity states or \
statuses for adolescents: identity achievement, foreclosure, moratorium, and diffusion. \
These categories differ in terms of two factors, crisis and commitment. \
\
     IDENTITY ACHIEVEMENT    The person who is in the state of identity \
     achievement has actively struggled and explored several options and then \
     developed her or his own set of goals and values. Thus, the adolescent has resolved \
     the crisis and made a commitment. \
\
     FORECLOSURE An adolescent who is in the state of identity foreclosure has \
     committed to a goal without exploring other alternatives. This adolescent tends to \
     accept a ready-made identity chosen by an authority figure. For example, a person \
     becomes a physician because both parents are physicians and believe that their child \
     should also be a physician. Thus, there has been an absence of crisis for the \
     adolescent, yet a commitment has been made. \
\
     MORATORIUM The person in the moratorium status has not yet made a definite \
     commitment and is in the active process of struggling with decisions, and exploring \
     interests and needs. The adolescent in moratorium is in crisis, with an absence of \
     commitment. The most typical outcome will be some resolution of the crisis with \
     the ability to commit. \
\
     IDENTITY DIFFUSION Identity diffusion describes the adolescent who lacks \
     direction, is not committed to goals and values, and is not seriously considering \
     options or trying to develop goals. In the state of identity diffusion, both crisis and \
     commitment are absent. Some people in this category become aimless drifters. \
\
>ADOLESCENCE AND CULTURE Perceptions of adolescents, in terms of maturity, \
are heavily influenced by social events. For example, during times of war, older \
adolescents are generally seen as mature and able to fight. By contrast, during periods of \
economic depression when there is significant competition for limited work, adolescents \
are seen as immature and not yet prepared to enter the work force. \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
Researchers have studied differences between minority and non-minority adolescents in \
terms of important social issues. It has been found that minority adolescents are much more \
likely to be raised by a single parent, with higher likelihood of poverty, less education, \
increased drug use, and if female, raising a child as a single parent. The greatest social risk \
for African American adolescents is murder, with homicide rates being six times that of \
Whites. \
\
Sexual experiences, in terms of age of onset, are also associated with social and ethnic \
background. African American adolescents of both sexes are more likely than Hispanic or \
White peers to have had sex at each age throughout their teens. Much of this is influenced \
by what is considered culturally normative. Overall, earlier sexual activity is linked to early \
pregnancy and greater likelihood of contracting STDs, with contraceptive use becoming \
more common only as adolescents become older. Only 60% of teens report use of a condom \
during the last intercourse. Pregnant adolescents are more likely than other mothers to \
deliver low-birth weight infants, who in turn are more likely to have developmental delays. \
\
All sexually transmitted diseases are more common among poor and minority children as \
compared with other groups. A 1993 study found that in teenagers, 51% of AIDS cases in \
boys, and 75% in girls were racial or ethnic minorities, with the bulk being African \
American. \
\
Conflicts between parents and teens typically intensify around puberty and then begin to \
subside. Adolescents are more susceptible to peer pressure in early adolescence, and this \
begins to lessen after the age of 13 or 14. \
\
One in eight adolescents drops out of school. Four out of five prison inmates are high- \
school dropouts. Dropouts are twice as likely to be unemployed as compared with high \
school graduates. \
\
H. SOCIAL ISSUES IN LATE ADULTHOOD \
\
>THEORIES OF SUCCESSFUL AGING Two theories have been proposed to explain \
successful aging: activity theory and disengagement theory. \
\
     DISENGAGEMENT THEORY Disengagement theory argues that successful \
     aging involves a natural and graceful withdrawal from life roles that a person can \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright \'80 2019 Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 8/Developmental/45 \
\
                               Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
     no longer carry out due to the physical limitations of aging. The disengagement \
     theory has been largely discredited. \
\
     ACTIVITY THEORY Activity theory posits that old age is fulfilling when the \
     person remains active and involved as long as possible. \
\
>MARITAL SATISFACTION IN LATE ADULTHOOD Marital satisfaction tends to \
increase as a couple moves into late adulthood. Overall, the pattern of marital satisfaction \
is curvilinear: satisfaction tends to be high at the time of marriage, dips during the child- \
rearing years, and becomes higher again once all of the children have completed their teens. \
\
>GENDER AND CULTURAL VARIABLES IN AGING Within the U.S., differences \
have been found between older men and women. Older men tend to have more social status, \
income and sexual partners. Older women tend to have more friends, be more involved \
with family, but tend to have lower status and income. In fact, older women represent one \
of the lowest income levels in the U.S. \
\
Racial differences in aging include the fact that older adults from minority groups are more \
likely to become ill, but less likely to receive treatment. There are also greater percentages \
of minority older adults living below the poverty line. \
\
Ageism refers to negative views held toward older adults simply on the basis of their age. \
In the U.S., ageism is a significant stress for older adults, with many young people holding \
views that older adults are mentally slow and socially useless. In contrast, there are cultures \
(e.g., traditional Japanese, Chinese, and Navajo cultures) where ageism is minimal, older \
people are respected and highly valued, and are seen as wise elders or keepers of important \
traditions. \
\
>RETIREMENT   The large majority of men and women in the U.S. choose to retire \
some time in their sixties, even though they are still capable of working. While it has been \
suggested that retirement is associated with loss of self-esteem and depression, this appears \
to be a myth. Many older adults are glad to retire, and any resultant depression more \
commonly comes from a reduction in their standard of living rather than loss of self- \
esteem. \
\
>GRIEF AND DYING Older adults experience a disproportionate amount of loss and \
grief. The grieving process has been described in four stages: numbness, when the bereaved \
may feel little emotion other than emptiness or numbness, and signs of denial may also be \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
present; yearning, when obvious feelings of distress emerge, including intense longings, \
guilt feelings, anger and resentment; disorganization and despair, when life seems to lose \
its meaning and the mourner feels apathetic, submissive, and lacking in energy; and \
resolution or reorganization, when the survivor gradually accepts the loss both \
intellectually and emotionally and begins to build a new self-identity (e.g., as a single \
person who is no longer part of a couple). \
\
Confronting one's own death is the last major crisis faced. Based on extensive interviews \
with patients, Elizabeth Kubler-Ross proposed that most people go through five states \
when facing their own death: denial or disbelief, anger. bargaining, depression, and finally \
acceptance (DABDA). Critics of Kubler-Ross" stage theory of dying argue that each person \
is unique, and emotions and reactions depend on life circumstances, age, personality, etc. \
Kubler-Ross concurs that not all people go through the same stages in the same way. \
\
III. EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT \
\
A. TEMPERAMENT \
\
Most theories of temperament suggest temperament is rooted in biological differences. \
While many believe temperament exists from birth, few reliable differences in \
temperament have been identified in the first six months of life. \
\
Thomas & Chess (1977) have described three major categories of temperament into which \
65% of babies can be reliably separated. \
\
>EASY TEMPERAMENT    Easy temperament (40% of all babies) is defined by a \
regular, adaptable, mildly intense style that is positive and responsive. \
\
>DIFFICULT TEMPERAMENT Difficult temperament (10% of all babies) describes \
children who are moody, easily frustrated, tense, and overreact to most situations. \
\
>SLOW-TO-WARM-UP INFANTS   Slow-to-warm-up infants (15% of all babies) are \
mild in responding, are somewhat shy and withdrawn and need time to adjust to new \
experiences or people. \
\
One of the greatest influences on the child's development is thought to be the goodness- \
of-fit between the child's temperament and the environment. For example, a slow-to- \
\
\
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
warm-up child might be easily parented by an undemanding mother but might have a hard \
time with a performance-oriented mother. \
\
B. DEVELOPMENT OF EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION \
\
At birth, emotional expression is rather limited. The infant appears to display one of three \
emotional states: distress, contentment, or interest. By six months of age, a fuller display \
of emotion is evident, including contentment, joy, surprise, interest, sadness, disgust, and \
anger. It is believed that by seven to nine months, emotions, as displayed by a smile or \
pout, are used instrumentally by the infant in an attempt to get his or her way. \
\
As they get older, infants detect and share affective states with their parents. Social \
referencing. for example, becomes common at about one year of age. At this time, the \
child will use cues from another person, such as the mother, to deal with affective \
uncertainty (e.g., whether a situation is dangerous or exciting). \
\
By age two, self-conscious emotions of embarrassment, empathy and envy are clearly \
evident. For preschoolers, a significant developmental task involves learning to better \
regulate emotions. At this age, the attainment of object constancy, described by Mahler, is \
important for facilitating emotional regulation. The preschooler needs to develop the ability \
to self-soothe, and to reduce and tolerate the anxiety that emerges in response to separation \
from the primary caretaker. Object constancy depends on the child's capacity to recall an \
image of the caretaker as soothing even when the caretaker is absent. \
\
There is strong support that certain basic emotions may be innate. For example, infants in \
their first day of life manifest facial expressions that mimic adult expressions of emotion. \
At a young age, infants are able to recognize facial expressions in others. In addition, the \
expression of certain emotions is extremely similar across cultures. Modern evolution \
theory holds that basic emotions originate in the subcortical limbic system and therefore \
evolved prior to thought (which occurs in the more evolved cortical system). Along these \
lines, several theorists propose that there are seven to ten primary emotions that are \
culturally universal (typically including some versions of fear, anger, disgust, surprise, joy, \
shame, contempt, sadness, and interest). However, more complex emotions such as love \
and remorse require higher cortical processes. \
\
Adolescence is a period that has traditionally been associated with difficulties managing \
emotions. Empirical investigation, however, offers little support for the idea that \
adolescence is a period of emotional turmoil and intense conflict between parents and their \
\
\
 \
\
                                Section 8 - Developmental: Psychosocial Development \
\
teens. In terms of adolescent emotional development, self-acceptance is considered to be \
most critical for healthy development. \
\
\
\
                               Section 8- Developmental: Risk and Protective Factors \
\
   8.5 RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS IN \
                   DEVELOPMENT \
\
While the predominant focus in the area of developmental psychology is on normal \
development, an equally important area that merits attention and understanding is \
developmental deviation or psychopathology. Developmental psychopathology is broadly \
thought to be a function of risk and protective factors. \
\
>RISK FACTORS In terms of risk factors, three categories are generally delineated: risk \
factors at the level of the individual (e.g., defective genes, difficult temperament), risk \
factors at the level of the family (e.g., mentally ill parent, child abuse), and those at the \
level of the community (e.g., discrimination, poverty). \
\
One strategy to determine the overall risk for developmental psychopathology is to add up \
the specific risk factors faced, thereby creating an adversity index. Most people can cope \
with a small number of risk factors, especially if protective factors are also present. \
However, when many risk factors are present, individuals frequently begin to show signs \
of disturbance. \
\
It turns out that risk factors rarely occur in isolation, and that a given risk factor can \
sometimes more accurately be described as an accumulation of many separate risk factors. \
The risk factors of poverty and maternal substance abuse are used as examples. \
\
     POVERTY Poverty brings biological risks, including lack of prenatal care, higher \
     rates of prenatal drug and alcohol exposure, and poorer nutrition. Poverty is \
     associated with a nearly 50% greater risk of prenatal and postnatal infant deaths. \
     Poverty can also have significant effects on parenting style, and responsiveness to \
     the infant or child's needs, which can lead to problems with attachment. Attachment \
     problems can result in subsequent behavioral problems, impulse control problems, \
     low self-esteem, poor peer relations, and diminished cognitive performance. \
     Lower-income neighborhoods also tend to have higher rates of delinquency and \
     crime, with children experiencing increased exposure to adult criminal behavior. \
     substance abuse, and child abuse. \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 8- Developmental: Risk and Protective Factors \
\
     MATERNAL SUBSTANCE ABUSE Maternal substance abuse brings with it a \
     myriad of risks. Most significantly, substances (e.g., alcohol, cocaine) ingested \
     during pregnancy, called teratogens, can have direct toxic effects on the fetus and \
     cause long-term developmental problems. In large quantities, for example, alcohol \
    has been linked to fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS); even small amounts of alcohol \
     (less than one drink per day) may lead to effects that are similar to FAS but are less \
     severe. Furthermore, the drug abusing lifestyle is frequently associated with \
     inadequate nutrition and poor prenatal care. Drug abuse is more common among \
     women living in poverty, and substance use during pregnancy is highly correlated \
     with parental psychopathology. Additionally, chaos, disorganization, and multiple \
     caregivers commonly mark the caregiving environment of infants born to substance \
     abusing mothers. \
\
The potency of any particular risk factor appears to vary with age and sex. Overall, boys \
appear more vulnerable to risk factors from the prenatal period to about age ten, while girls \
grow more vulnerable to risk factors during their teens. In general girls appear to possess \
a wider range of coping skills than boys, especially in their ability to form relationships. \
\
>PROTECTIVE FACTORS/RESILIENCE Protective factors are generally less well \
understood. Physical health, normal or high IQ, and economic advantage are examples of \
protective factors. In particular, research has consistently highlighted the importance of \
two factors in accounting for resilience: good cognitive functioning and positive \
relationships (e.g., the ability to obtain help and to find and use an external support system). \
Garmezy proposed an interpersonal view of protective factors, stressing three categories: \
personality disposition of the child, supportive family environment, and an external support \
system that reinforces a child's coping efforts. \
\
\
\
                   \
\
                      DSM-5 \
\
                       SECTION 9 \
\
                     PsychPrep \
                     PASS EFFICIENTLY \
 \
\
                SECTION 9: DSM-5 \
\
       9.1 OVERVIEW       AND SUMMARY OF \
                      CHANGES \
\
I. OVERVIEW \
\
The DSM-5 is organized based on developmental and lifespan considerations, as well as a \
clustering of disorders based on internalizing and externalizing factors. The DSM-5 begins \
with disorders thought to reflect developmental processes that manifest early in life (e.g., \
the neurodevelopmental and schizophrenia spectrum disorders), followed by diagnoses that \
more commonly manifest in adolescence and young adulthood that are internalizing (e.g., \
depressive, anxiety, somatic), disorders that are externalizing (e.g., impulsive, disruptive \
conduct and substance use), and ending with diagnoses related to later life (e.g., \
neurocognitive). \
\
The DSM-5 moved to a nonaxial documentation of diagnosis with separate notation for \
important social and contextual factors and disability. The WHODAS (WHO Disability \
Assessment Schedule) is included in the DSM-5 section called emerging measures and \
models. Also included in that section are clinician-rated dimensions of psychosis symptom \
severity, cultural formulation, an alternative DSM-5 model for personality disorders, and \
conditions for further study (e.g., attenuated psychosis syndrome, persistent complex \
bereavement disorder, internet gaming disorder, suicidal behavior disorder). \
\
According to the DSM-5, "A mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by clinically \
significant disturbance in an individual's cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that \
reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes \
underlying mental functioning. Mental disorders are usually associated with significant \
distress or disability in social, occupational, or other important activities." (DSM-5, p. 20). \
An expectable or culturally approved response to a stressor or loss is not a mental disorder. \
Additionally, socially deviant behavior per se is not a mental disorder, unless the deviance \
results from a dysfunction in the person. The medication-induced movement disorders and \
other conditions that may be a focus of clinical attention, are also not considered mental \
disorders. \
\
\
\
                              Section 9 - DSM-5: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
In the DSM-5, general convention is to allow multiple diagnoses for presentations that meet \
criteria for more than one DSM-5 disorder. \
\
II. SUMMARY OF CHANGES FROM DSM-IV TO DSM-5 \
\
NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS \
\
1) The neurodevelopmental disorders chapter is new and replaces disorders usually first \
diagnosed in infancy, childhood, and adolescence. \
\
2) Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) replaces mental retardation. \
Severity is now determined based on adaptive functioning rather than IQ score. \
\
3) Changes to the communication disorders include a new diagnosis of language disorder \
(a combination of expressive and mixed receptive-expressive language disorder), speech \
sound disorder (previously phonological disorder), and childhood onset fluency disorder \
(previously stuttering). A new disorder has been added, social (pragmatic) communication \
disorder, involving persistent difficulties in the social uses of verbal and nonverbal \
communication. \
\
4) Autism spectrum disorder is a new disorder, and encompasses autistic disorder, \
Asperger's disorder, and childhood disintegrative disorder. Autism spectrum disorder is \
characterized by deficits in two dimensions: a) social communication and interaction; b) \
restricted repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, activities. \
\
5) For attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) age of onset has been changed to \
symptoms present prior to age 12. A comorbid diagnosis with autism spectrum disorder \
is now allowed. For adults, symptom threshold cutoff is five symptoms rather than six (as \
required for younger persons). \
\
6) Specific learning disorder combines reading disorder, mathematics disorder, and \
disorder of written expression, with specifiers denoting the domains that are impaired. \
\
7) Motor disorders include developmental coordination disorder, stereotypic movement \
disorder, and tic disorders [Tourette's disorder, persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic, and \
provisional tic disorder]. \
\
\
 \
\
                              Section 9 - DSM-5: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
SCHIZOPHRENIA SPECTRUM AND OTHER PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS \
\
1) Changes made to the criteria for schizophrenia include: a) elimination of the allowance \
that bizarre delusions or two or more voices conversing suffice for a diagnosis of \
schizophrenia; thus the requirement is now at least two symptoms, and b) at least one of \
the symptoms must be delusions, hallucinations, or disorganized speech. Subtypes have \
been eliminated (e.g., paranoid, disorganized). A dimensional approach to rating severity \
for each of the core symptoms was added. \
\
2) Schizoaffective disorder in now conceptualized as a longitudinal diagnosis and requires \
that a major mood episode is present for a majority of the disorder's duration. \
\
3) There is no longer a requirement that the delusions in delusional disorder are non- \
bizarre; a specifier is added for bizarre type. \
\
4) Criteria for catatonia are described, and may be diagnosed with a specifier for any of \
the psychotic disorders (as well as depressive and bipolar disorders). \
\
5) Schizotypal personality disorder is included in both this chapter and the personality \
disorders chapter. \
\
BIPOLAR AND RELATED DISORDERS \
\
1) For bipolar disorder, diagnostic criteria include changes in mood and changes in \
activity/energy. New specifiers of with mixed features and with anxious distress have been \
added. \
\
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS \
\
1) A new diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder has been added for children \
up to age 18 who exhibit persistent irritability and episodes of behavioral dyscontrol. This \
came out of concern for overdiagnosing bipolar disorder in children. \
\
2) Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is a new diagnosis. \
\
3) Dysthymia has been subsumed under persistent depressive disorder, which also includes \
persistent major depressive disorder. \
\
\
\
                              Section 9 - DSM-5: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
4) A major depressive episode with at least three manic symptoms is typed as with mixed \
features. \
\
5) The exclusion that major depressive disorder could not be diagnosed until at least 2 \
months after a loss associated with bereavement has been removed. \
\
ANXIETY DISORDERS \
\
1) The chapter on anxiety disorders no longer includes obsessive-compulsive disorder \
(OCD) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). They have each been put into their own \
chapters. \
\
2) For specific phobia and social anxiety disorder (social phobia), the requirement that \
the person recognizes the anxiety is unreasonable has been deleted. Anxiety must be out of \
proportion to actual danger while taking cultural factors into account. \
\
3) Social anxiety disorder now has a performance only specifier. \
\
4) The specifier with panic attacks can be included with all DSM-5 disorders. \
\
5) Panic disorder and agoraphobia are no longer linked; they are considered two separate \
diagnoses when both are present. \
\
6) Separation anxiety and selective mutism are included in the chapter on anxiety \
disorders. Separation anxiety no longer requires onset before age 18. \
\
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE AND RELATED DISORDERS \
\
1) Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders is a new chapter in DSM-5. \
\
2) New disorders in this chapter include hoarding and excoriation (skin-picking). \
\
3) Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) is included as an obsessive-compulsive and \
related disorder. \
\
4) Specifiers for obsessive-compulsive and related disorders include: with good or fair \
insight, poor insight, and absent insight/delusional. \
\
5) A tic-related specifier has been added to obsessive-compulsive disorder. \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 9 - DSM-S: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
 6) A body dysmorphic disorder that is delusional is no longer diagnosed as delusional \
 disorder, somatic; rather it is diagnosed as body dysmorphic with absent insight/delusional \
 specifier. \
\
 7) Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorders can include obsessional \
jealousy. \
\
 TRAUMA- AND STRESSOR-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
 1) Trauma- and stressor-related disorders is a new chapter in the DSM-5. \
\
 2) For acute stress disorder, the qualifying traumatic event is now explicit as to whether it \
 was experienced directly, witnessed, or experienced indirectly. The subjective reaction \
 criterion (e.g., experienced fear, helplessness, horror) has been eliminated. \
\
 3) Adjustment disorders are now conceptualized as an array of stress-response syndromes \
 that occur after exposure to distressing events that can be either traumatic or nontraumatic. \
\
 4) Criteria for PTSD are now more explicit with regard to what qualifies as traumatic (e.g., \
 experienced directly, witnessed, or experienced indirectly). The subjective reaction \
 criterion has been eliminated. There are now four symptom clusters that contribute to a \
 diagnosis of PTSD: intrusion symptoms, persistent avoidance, negative alterations in \
 cognition/mood, arousal and reactivity. The avoidance/numbing cluster from the DSM-IV \
 has been split into the two symptom clusters of persistent avoidance and negative \
 alterations in mood/cognition. Symptoms of arousal and reactivity now include irritable \
 behavior or angry outbursts and reckless or self-destructive behaviors. PTSD is now also \
 developmentally sensitive (e.g., lower thresholds for children and adolescents). \
\
 5) In DSM-5, reactive attachment disorder (which had two subtypes in DSM-IV) has been \
 separated into two separate disorders: reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social \
 engagement disorder. \
\
DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS \
\
 1) Depersonalization disorder is now named depersonalization/derealization disorder. \
\
 2) Dissociative fugue is no longer a separate disorder; now it is a specifier for dissociative \
 amnesia. \
\
 \
\
                               Section 9 - DSM-S: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
 6) A body dysmorphic disorder that is delusional is no longer diagnosed as delusional \
 disorder, somatic; rather it is diagnosed as body dysmorphic with absent insight/delusional \
 specifier. \
\
 7) Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorders can include obsessional \
jealousy. \
\
 TRAUMA- AND STRESSOR-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
 1) Trauma- and stressor-related disorders is a new chapter in the DSM-5. \
\
 2) For acute stress disorder, the qualifying traumatic event is now explicit as to whether it \
 was experienced directly, witnessed, or experienced indirectly. The subjective reaction \
 criterion (e.g., experienced fear, helplessness, horror) has been eliminated. \
\
 3) Adjustment disorders are now conceptualized as an array of stress-response syndromes \
 that occur after exposure to distressing events that can be either traumatic or nontraumatic. \
\
 4) Criteria for PTSD are now more explicit with regard to what qualifies as traumatic (e.g., \
 experienced directly, witnessed, or experienced indirectly). The subjective reaction \
 criterion has been eliminated. There are now four symptom clusters that contribute to a \
diagnosis of PTSD: intrusion symptoms, persistent avoidance, negative alterations in \
cognition/mood, arousal and reactivity. The avoidance/numbing cluster from the DSM-IV \
has been split into the two symptom clusters of persistent avoidance and negative \
alterations in mood/cognition. Symptoms of arousal and reactivity now include irritable \
 behavior or angry outbursts and reckless or self-destructive behaviors. PTSD is now also \
developmentally sensitive (e.g., lower thresholds for children and adolescents). \
\
5) In DSM-5, reactive attachment disorder (which had two subtypes in DSM-IV) has been \
 separated into two separate disorders: reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social \
 engagement disorder. \
\
DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS \
\
 1) Depersonalization disorder is now named depersonalization/derealization disorder. \
\
 2) Dissociative fugue is no longer a separate disorder; now it is a specifier for dissociative \
 amnesia. \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 9 - DSM-S: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
 3) Criteria for dissociative identity disorder now include that the disruption in identity may \
 be reported or observed, and gaps in recall may occur for everyday events, not just \
 traumatic events. Additionally, in some cultures, experiences of pathological possession \
 are included as identity disruption. \
\
 SOMATIC SYMPTOM AND RELATED DISORDERS \
\
 1) The somatic symptom and related disorders chapter replaces the somatoform disorders \
 chapter. \
\
 2) There has been a reduction in the number of somatic symptom disorders and \
 subcategories to reduce overlap. The DSM-IV diagnoses of somatization disorder, \
 hypochondriasis, pain disorder, and undifferentiated somatoform have been removed. \
\
 3) Persons who met criteria for somatization disorder may be diagnosed with somatic \
 symptom disorder, but only if they also have maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors \
 in addition to their somatic symptoms. Undifferentiated somatoform disorder is also \
 subsumed in somatic symptom disorder. \
\
 4) Persons previously diagnosed with hypochondriasis might now receive a diagnosis of \
 illness anxiety disorder, unless the health anxiety is better explained as part of another \
 anxiety disorder. \
\
 5) Some individuals with chronic pain might be diagnosed as having somatic symptom \
 disorder, with predominant pain. For others with chronic pain, the diagnosis might be \
psychological factors affecting other medical conditions or an adjustment disorder. \
\
 6) Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is a new mental disorder. \
 formerly listed in the DSM-IV chapter of other conditions that may be a focus of clinical \
 attention. \
\
 7) Factitious disorder is no longer in its own chapter, but is now included in the somatic \
 symptom and related disorders chapter. \
\
 8) Criteria for conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder) \
 emphasize the importance of a neurological exam, rather than psychological factors. \
\
 \
\
                               Section 9 - DSM-5: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
 9) Other specified somatic symptom and related disorder includes pseudocyesis (false \
 pregnancy). \
\
 FEEDING AND EATING DISORDERS \
\
 1) Feeding and eating disorders is a new chapter in the DSM-5 and includes pica and \
 rumination disorder. \
\
 2) Feeding and eating disorder of infancy/early childhood has been renamed \
 avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder. \
\
 3) For anorexia, the requirement for amenorrhea has been eliminated. Criteria have been \
 clarified to include: the individual must be at a significantly low body weight for \
 developmental stage, and overtly expressed fear of weight gain or persistent behaviors that \
 interfere with weight gain must be present. \
\
 4) Requirements for bulimia have been reduced from binge eating/compensatory behavior \
 twice a week for at least 3 months to once weekly for at least 3 months. \
\
 5) Binge-eating disorder is a new diagnosis involving recurrent episodes of binge eating. \
 once weekly for at least 3 months. \
\
 ELIMINATION DISORDERS \
\
 1) There were no changes made to these disorders (enuresis and encopresis). However, the \
 elimination disorders chapter is new. \
\
SLEEP-WAKE DISORDERS \
\
 1) Primary insomnia has been renamed insomnia disorder, as there is now no \
 differentiation between primary and secondary insomnia. \
\
2) The DSM-5 distinguishes between narcolepsy (associated with hypocretin deficiency) \
and other forms of hypersomnolence (hypersomnolence disorder). \
\
3) Breathing related sleep disorders now include obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, \
central sleep apnea, and sleep-related hypoventilation. \
\
 \
 \
\
                               Section 9-DSM-5: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
4) Subtypes of circadian rhythm sleep disorders include advanced sleep phase type and \
irregular sleep-wake type; jet lag type was removed. \
\
5) Rapid eye movement sleep disorder and restless legs syndrome are new disorders. \
\
SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS \
\
1) Some gender specific sexual disorders have been added in DSM-5. \
\
2) Sexual desire and arousal disorders have been combined into female sexual \
interest/arousal disorder. \
\
3) All of the sexual dysfunctions require a minimum of 6 months. \
\
4) Vaginismus and dyspaneuria have been merged into genito-pelvic pain/ penetration \
disorder (as the two disorders were highly comorbid). \
\
5) Sexual aversion disorder has been removed. \
\
6) Sexual dysfunctions are now coded with only two subtypes: lifelong or acquired and \
generalized or situational. The subtype due to psychological factors or due to combined \
(psychological/medical) factors has been eliminated. To indicate the presence of medical \
and nonmedical correlates, DSM-5 has added the following features: partner factors, \
relationship factors, individual vulnerability factors, cultural or religious factors, and \
medical factors. \
\
GENDER DYSPHORIA \
\
1) Gender dysphoria is a new diagnostic class in DSM-5 and a new diagnosis (formerly \
gender identity disorder in DSM-IV), reflecting a change in conceptualization from cross- \
gender identification to gender incongruence. \
\
2) Posttransition specifier applies to individuals who have undergone a medical procedure \
or treatment to support the new gender. \
\
DISRUPTIVE, IMPULSE-CONTROL, AND CONDUCT DISORDERS \
\
1) The chapter disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders is new to the DSM-5. \
It includes disorders previously found in the DSM-IV chapters of disorders first diagnosed \
\
\
\
                               Section 9- DSM-5: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
in infancy, childhood, or adolescence, as well as impulse-control disorders not elsewhere \
classified. \
\
2) Disorders in this chapter include oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), conduct \
disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, pyromania, and kleptomania. While ADHD is \
frequently comorbid with disorders in this category, it is listed in the neurodevelopmental \
disorders chapter. \
\
3) Antisocial personality disorder is included in both this chapter and the personality \
disorders chapter. \
\
4) Criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are grouped into three categories: \
angry/irritable mood; argumentative/ defiant behavior; and vindictiveness. \
\
5) Conduct disorder includes a specifier with limited prosocial emotions. \
\
6) In intermittent explosive disorder, verbal aggression and nondestructive/ noninjurious \
physical aggression also meet criteria. A minimum age of 6 is required. \
\
SUBSTANCE-RELATED AND ADDICTIVE DISORDERS \
\
1) This chapter has been expanded to include gambling disorder. \
\
2) In the DSM-5, substance abuse and substance dependence are no longer separated into \
two disorders; the disorder is now called substance use disorder. \
\
3) For substance use disorder, the requirement of recurrent substance-related legal \
problems has been removed and cravings (strong desire or urge to use a substance) has \
been added. \
\
4) The threshold for substance use disorder is two or more criteria. In the DSM-IV, there \
was one criterion for substance abuse and three criteria for substance dependence. Severity \
is based on number of criteria met. \
\
5) Cannabis withdrawal and caffeine withdrawal are new disorders. \
\
6) The physiological subtype has been eliminated and polysubstance dependence has also \
been eliminated. \
\
\
 \
\
                               Section 9-DSM-5: Overview and Summary of Changes \
\
 7) Early remission is at least 3 months but less than 12 months without meeting substance \
 use disorder criteria (except cravings) and sustained remission is at least 12 months \
 without meeting criteria (except cravings). \
\
 8) New DSM-5 specifiers include in a controlled environment and on maintenance \
 therapy. \
\
NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDERS \
\
 1) The diagnoses of dementia and amnestie disorder are subsumed under the diagnosis of \
 major neurocognitive disorder (NCD). \
\
 2) When there is less severe cognitive impairment, the new diagnosis of mild \
neurocognitive disorder (NCD) is given. \
\
 3) Diagnostic criteria are provided for etiological subtypes (e.g., due to Alzheimer's \
 disease, due to traumatic brain injury). Neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal \
 disorder, with Lewy bodies, and due to prion disease have been added. \
\
 PERSONALITY DISORDERS \
\
 1) Criteria for personality disorders are unchanged from the DSM-IV. \
\
 2) An alternative approach to the diagnosis of personality disorders was developed for the \
 DSM-5 based on impairments in personality functioning and pathological personality \
 traits. This approach is described in the section on emerging measures and models. \
\
 PARAPHILIC DISORDERS \
\
 1) Changes in the DSM-5 include the addition of course specifiers in a controlled \
 environment and in remission for all paraphilic disorders. \
\
 2) DSM-5 distinguishes between paraphilias and paraphilie disorders. A paraphilia (e.g .. \
 a fetish) by itself does not automatically justify or require clinical intervention. A paraphilie \
 disorder is a paraphilia that causes distress or impairment to the individual or whose \
 satisfaction has entailed personal harm or risk of harm to others. \
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9 -DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
  9.2 NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS \
\
 The neurodevelopmental disorders typically manifest early in development, commonly \
 before the child enters grade school. The developmental deficits result in impairment in \
 personal, social, academic, or occupational functioning. The range of deficits is variable. \
 from very specific (e.g., specific learning disorder) to global (e.g., autism spectrum \
 disorder). Neurodevelopmental disorders frequently co-occur. \
\
 I. INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY \
\
 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) involves deficits in general \
 mental abilities (e.g., reasoning, problem solving, abstract thinking, academic learning), as \
 well as deficits in adaptive functioning in one or more areas (e.g., communication, social \
 participation, independent living) across multiple environments (e.g., school, home, work). \
 Onset is during the development period. \
\
 Persons with intellectual disability typically have IQ scores that are two or more standard \
 deviations below the mean. The level of severity is based on adaptive functioning, not IQ \
 score, as adaptive functioning determines how much support a person will require. \
\
 Adaptive functioning is assessed in three areas: the conceptual/academic domain, which \
 involves memory, language, reading, writing, math reasoning, problem solving, etc .; the \
 social domain, which involves empathy, interpersonal communication, friendship abilities, \
 social judgment, etc .; and the practical domain, which involves personal care, money \
 management, recreation, school and work task organization, etc. Specifiers for severity \
 include: mild, moderate, severe, and profound. \
\
 Intellectual disability, mild is characterized by some difficulties in learning academic skills \
 (in children), and impairments in abstract thinking, executive functioning, and short-term \
 memory (in adults); immaturity in social interactions (including risk of gullibility) with \
 possible difficulty regulating emotions and behavior; a need for some support with \
 complex daily living tasks (e.g., money management, home and child-care organization, \
 transportation), health care and legal decisions, and learning of a skilled vocation. \
\
 Intellectual disability, moderate is characterized by significant lags in academic skill \
 development (for adults, academic skills are typically at an elementary level); capacity for \
 relationships in spite of marked deficits in social and communicative behavior, and \
\
 \
 \
\
                                 Section 9 -DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
limitations in social judgment and decision-making; the capacity for self-care (with \
extensive training), employment in jobs that require limited conceptual and communication \
skills, and need of considerable support to manage social expectations, transportation, \
health, money management, etc. \
\
Intellectual disability, severe is characterized by limited attainment of conceptual skills, \
with little understanding of written language, number concepts, time, etc .; spoken language \
is very limited in terms of vocabulary and grammar, comprehension is limited to simple \
speech and gestures, yet relationships are a source of pleasure; support and supervision is \
needed for all activities of daily living and decisions that must be made. \
\
Intellectual disability, profound is characterized by motor and sensory impairments; very \
limited understanding of communication in speech and gestures, and use of nonverbal \
communication; dependency on others for all aspects of care, with some ability to \
participate (e.g., in recreation, carrying dishes to the table). \
\
Deficits in both intellectual functioning and adaptive functioning are typically determined \
by clinical assessment as well as standardized testing. Deficits in adaptive functioning may \
be assessed with the Vineland Adaptive Behaviors Scale. \
\
Intellectual disability may involve prenatal, perinatal, or postnatal etiologies. About 75% \
of all cases of intellectual disability are prenatal in origin, about 10 -15% perinatal (from 1 \
pound in utero to 1 month after birth), and 10 - 15% postnatal. \
\
Genetic factors have a small influence on intellectual disability, accounting for only about \
5% of the cases (e.g., chromosomal abnormalities, such as Down's syndrome). \
\
Environmental factors play a much larger role. During the prenatal period, the most \
common cause of intellectual disability is alterations during the embryonic stage of \
development (from conception to 8 weeks). Factors that may lead to intellectual disability \
include poor maternal nutritional state, poor maternal personal health habits, limited access \
to health care, and exposure in utero to pollutants, chemicals, and toxins (e.g., maternal \
alcohol consumption). \
\
During the perinatal period, intellectual disability may be caused by fetal malnutrition, \
hypoxia, prematurity, trauma, or viral infections. Intellectual disability occurring \
postnatally is usually brought about by hypoxic ischemic injury, traumatic brain injury. \
seizure disorders, severe and chronic social deprivation, toxins, or infection. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 9 -DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
The population prevalence rate of intellectual disability is about 1%, with the \
preponderance of persons who receive this diagnosis (85%) to be of mild severity. \
Individuals with intellectual disability have three to four times more comorbid mental \
disorders compared to the general population. The most commonly associated mental \
disorders include ADHD, depressive and bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders, autism \
spectrum disorder, stereotypic movement disorder, impulse-control disorders, and major \
neurocognitive disorders. The male-to-female ratio is about 1.5: 1. \
\
>GLOBAL DEVELOPMENTAL DELAY This diagnosis is made when the person is \
under the age of 5, fails to meet expected developmental milestones, and cannot be reliably \
assessed (e.g., too young to participate in standardized testing). Requires reassessment over \
time. \
\
>UNSPECIFIED INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY This diagnosis is made when the \
person is over the age of 5, when assessment of the degree of intellectual disability is \
difficult or impossible because of associated impairments (e.g., blindness, severe behavior \
problems). Requires reassessment over time. \
\
II. COMMUNICATION DISORDERS \
\
The communication disorders include deficits in language, speech, and communication. \
Language refers to the form, function, and use of words; speech is the expressive \
production of sounds and words; and communication includes verbal and nonverbal \
behavior. \
\
>LANGUAGE DISORDER The hallmark of language disorder is difficulty acquiring and \
using language due to deficits in comprehension or production including: limited \
vocabulary, limited sentence structure, and impairments in discourse. \
\
Language disorder diagnosed from age 4 is likely to be stable over time and persist into \
adulthood. \
\
>SPEECH SOUND DISORDER Speech sound disorder involves difficulty with \
phonology and articulation that interferes with intelligibility or prevents verbal \
communication. Examples include errors in sound production and use, including \
substituting one sound for another or omitting sounds such as final consonants. \
\
Most children with speech sound disorder respond well to treatment, and their difficulties \
improve over time. Thus, this disorder may not be lifelong. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9-DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
>CHILDHOOD-ONSET FLUENCY DISORDER (Stuttering) Childhood-onset \
fluency disorder is diagnosed when there is a disturbance in the normal fluency and time \
patterning of speech, characterized by sound and syllable repetitions, interjections, broken \
words, blocking, circumlocutions, and monosyllabic whole-word repetitions. \
\
Stuttering is considered to be normal until about age 2 and would not warrant a diagnosis \
until after that age. The age of onset for childhood-onset fluency disorder is typically \
between ages 2 - 7 years. A large percentage (65% - 85%) of children recover from the \
dysfluency. \
\
>SOCIAL (PRAGMATIC) COMMUNICATION DISORDER This disorder involves \
difficulties in the social use of verbal and nonverbal communication as manifest by all of \
the following: a) deficits in communication for social purposes (e.g., greeting), problems \
changing communication to match context (e.g., speaking differently in a classroom than \
on the playground); b) difficulties following rules of conversation (e.g., taking turns); and \
c) difficulty understanding nonliteral or ambiguous meanings (e.g. idioms, humor, \
metaphors). \
\
>UNSPECIFIED COMMUNICATION DISORDER \
\
III. AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER \
\
>AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER The essential features of autism spectrum disorder \
include: a) persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across \
multiple contexts (e.g., deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, deficits in nonverbal \
behaviors in social interaction, deficits in developing and understanding relationships); and \
b) restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities as manifest by at least \
two of the following: stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech; \
inflexible adherence to routine; restricted, fixated interests; or hyper- or hyporeactivity to \
sensory input. \
\
Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period, and must cause clinically \
significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. \
\
Severity level is coded in terms of level of support needed for deficits in both social \
communication as well as restricted, repetitive behavior: Level 1 - requiring support, Level \
2 - requiring substantial support, and Level 3 - requiring very substantial support. \
Specification of with or without accompanying intellectual impairment and with or without \
accompanying language impairment is also recorded. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 9 -DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
The frequency of autism spectrum disorder in the population is 1%. Many persons with \
autism spectrum disorder also have intellectual impairment and/or language impairment. \
The prognosis is best with an absence of intellectual impairment and functional language \
by age 5. Male to female ratio is 4:1. Heritability estimates for autism spectrum disorder \
are quite high (ranging from about 35% to 90% in twin studies), with as many as 15% of \
all cases associated with a known genetic mutation. \
\
Symptoms of autism spectrum disorder are typically evident in the second year of life \
(between 12- 24 months) but may be seen earlier if the delays are more severe or later if \
the symptoms are more subtle. \
\
A savant is an individual with striking abilities (e.g., able to play music perfectly after \
hearing it just once, or able to do complex mathematical calculations in his or her head) \
who is otherwise disabled in everyday cognitive functions and/or social interactions. \
Savant abilities are sometimes found in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (i.e., \
"autistic savant"). \
\
Autism spectrum disorder shares some features with Rett syndrome. This syndrome, found \
almost exclusively in females, is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by normal \
prenatal and perinatal development, normal psychomotor development through 5 months, \
and normal head circumference at birth. Between 5 months and 48 months, there is a \
sudden deceleration of head growth, acquisition of stereotyped hand movements, loss of \
social engagement, and the appearance of poorly coordinated movements. However, after \
this period, there is typically an improvement in social communication skills and autistic \
features are no longer a major concern. \
\
IV. ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER \
\
>ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER (ADHD)   Attention- \
deficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by a persistent pattern (at least 6 months) of \
inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity. Some of the symptoms must have been \
present before 12 years of age, and impairment from the disorder must occur in at least two \
settings and be severe enough to interfere with functioning. \
\
Criteria for inattention are met when the person has six or more of the following symptoms \
(for adolescents and adults at least five symptoms are required): failure to pay attention to \
details resulting in careless errors, difficulty sustaining attention to tasks, does not seem to \
listen when spoken to directly, does not follow through or fails to finish assignments, has \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9 -DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
difficulty organizing tasks, avoids tasks requiring sustained attention, frequently loses \
things (e.g., homework assignments), is easily distracted, and is forgetful in daily activities. \
\
The criteria for hyperactivity-impulsivity are met when the person has six or more of the \
following symptoms (for adolescents and adults at least five symptoms are required): \
frequently fidgets or squirms, stands up when remaining seated is expected, runs or climbs \
excessively in inappropriate situations, has difficulty playing quietly, is constantly "on the \
go," talks excessively, blurts out answers before questions are completed, has difficulty \
waiting for his/her turn, and interrupts or intrudes on others. \
\
This disorder is coded either as: combined presentation, predominantly inattentive \
presentation, or predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation. Severity is coded as \
mild, moderate, or severe. The clinician must also specify if in partial remission in \
situations in which the full criteria were previously met, but fewer than full criteria have \
been met for the past 6 months, with symptoms still resulting in impairment. \
\
ADHD occurs in about 5% of children and 2.5% of adults. According to the DSM-5, \
ADHD is more common in males than females with a ratio of about 2:1. Medications used \
in the treatment of ADHD include the stimulants Ritalin (methylphenidate), Concerta \
(methylphenidate), Adderall (amphetamine), and Dexedrine (dextroamphetamine), and the \
non-stimulant Strattera (atomoxetine). Non-pharmacological interventions for children \
with ADHD include behavior therapy, social skills training, parenting education, and \
neurofeedback (formerly called EEG biofeedback). For adults with ADHD, cognitive \
behavioral therapy (CBT) is an evidence-based treatment. \
\
The diagnosis of ADHD can be particularly difficult to establish prior to age 4, mainly \
because it is hard to distinguish normal variations in behavior from the hyperactivity \
associated with ADHD. The disorder tends to be relatively stable through early \
adolescence; in adolescence and adulthood, symptoms of motoric hyperactivity decrease, \
while difficulties with restlessness, inattention, poor planning, and impulsivity continue. A \
significant proportion of children with ADHD remain impaired into adulthood. \
\
Associated features of ADHD may include low frustration tolerance, irritability, or mood \
lability, as well as social rejection and interpersonal conflict. Academic achievement and/or \
work performance is often impaired. When the diagnosis is ADHD combined presentation, \
there is frequently a comorbid oppositional defiant disorder (about 50% of the time) or \
conduct disorder (about 25% of the time). Most children with disruptive mood \
dysregulation disorder have ADHD, although most children with ADHD do not have \
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Specific learning disorder also commonly co- \
\
\
\
                                 Section 9-DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
occurs with ADHD. Other disorders that occur in individuals with ADHD at higher rates \
than in the general population include anxiety disorders, major depressive disorder, and \
substance use disorder. Co-occurring disorders also include antisocial and other personality \
disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, tic disorder, and autism spectrum disorder. By \
early adulthood, ADHD is associated with an increased suicide risk, especially when \
comorbid with a mood, conduct, or substance use disorder. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED ATTENTION-DEFICIT/HYPER- \
ACTIVITY DISORDER An example is ADHD with insufficient inattention symptoms. \
\
V. SPECIFIC LEARNING DISORDER \
\
Specific learning disorder is diagnosed when there are difficulties learning and using \
academic skills, with the presence of at least one symptom for at least 6 months despite \
interventions targeting the difficulties: inaccurate or slow and effortful reading, difficulty \
understanding the meaning of what is read, difficulties with spelling, difficulties with \
written expression (e.g., multiple grammatical or punctuation errors), difficulties mastering \
number facts or calculation, or difficulty with mathematical reasoning. The affected \
academic skills are substantially below those expected for the person's age, and the \
learning problem interferes with academic/occupational performance or activities of daily \
living. The criteria for substantially below are achievement test scores that are at least 1.5 \
standard deviations (SD) below the population mean for age (below the 7th percentile), not \
better accounted for by intellectual disabilities. \
\
All academic domains and subskills that are impaired should be coded. Specifiers include: \
with impairment in reading (word reading accuracy, reading rate or fluency, reading \
comprehension); with impairment in written expression (spelling accuracy, grammar and \
punctuation accuracy, clarity and organization of written expression); and with impairment \
in mathematics (number sense, memorization of arithmetic facts, accurate or fluent \
calculation, accurate math reasoning). Severity is specified as mild, moderate, or severe. \
\
The term dyslexia refers to problems with accurate or fluent word recognition, poor \
decoding, and poor spelling abilities. When the term dyslexia is used, any additional \
difficulties should also be noted (e.g., problems with reading comprehension). \
\
Dyscalculia refers to problems with numerical processing, problems learning arithmetic \
facts, and difficulty performing accurate calculations. When the term dyscalculia is used, \
any additional difficulties should also be noted (e.g., difficulties with math reasoning). \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9-DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
The prevalence rate for specific learning disorder is 5% - 15%. Specific learning disorder \
is more common in males than females (ratios range from 2:1 to 3:1). Comorbid disorders \
may include neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., ADHD, autism spectrum disorder) and \
other mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders, depressive and bipolar disorders, \
oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder). \
\
VI. MOTOR DISORDERS \
\
>DEVELOPMENTAL COORDINATION DISORDER This disorder is characterized \
by deficits in daily activities that require motor coordination, which may be manifested by \
marked delays in achieving motor milestones, or by clumsiness, poor performance in \
sports, or poor handwriting. \
\
>STEREOTYPIC MOVEMENT DISORDER    The essential feature of stereotypic \
movement disorder is motor behavior that is repetitive and nonfunctional (e.g., body \
rocking, head banging, self-biting, etc.) that interferes with normal activities or results in \
self-inflicted bodily injury. Stereotypic movement disorder cannot be diagnosed if the \
stereotyped behaviors are attributable to the effects of a substance or neurological \
condition, or is better explained by another disorder (e.g., obsessive-compulsive disorder, \
trichotillomania). The clinician must specify if with or without self-injurious behavior as \
well as the severity: mild, moderate, or severe. \
\
>TIC DISORDERS Tics are sudden, rapid, recurrent, non-rhythmic, stereotyped motor \
movements or vocalizations. Tic disorders include: Tourette's disorder, persistent \
(chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, and provisional tic disorder. Tourette's disorder \
involves multiple motor and one or more vocal tics. The tics may wax and wane in \
frequency, but have been present for more than 1 year since first tic onset. Persistent \
(chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder involves single or multiple motor or vocal tics, but \
not both, present for more than 1 year since first tic onset. Provisional tic disorder involves \
single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics present for less than 1 year since first tic onset. \
Onset of all tic disorders is before age 18. \
\
While tics are generally experienced as involuntary, they can be voluntarily suppressed for \
a limited time. Tics may increase under stress and may decrease during absorbing activities. \
Motor tics include eye blinking, neck jerking, shoulder shrugging, facial grimacing. \
grooming behaviors, jumping, or touching. Vocal ties include throat clearing, grunting, \
sniffing, barking, copralalia (swearing) and echolalia. Common treatment medications \
include Catapres (clonidine), an anti-hypertensive agent, and Haldol (haloperidol), an \
antipsychotic. The SSRI's, such as Prozac (fluoxetine), are also used. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 9 -DSM-5: Neurodevelopmental Disorders \
\
Tourette's disorder occurs in about 5 out of every 1,000 children, with males more \
commonly affected than females (ratio varying from 2:1 to 4:1). Children with Tourette's \
disorder are more likely to experience ADHD, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), or \
separation anxiety disorder, while adolescents and adults are more likely to experience \
major depressive disorder, substance use disorder, or bipolar disorder. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED TIC DISORDER \
\
VII. OTHER NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER \
An example is neurodevelopmental disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure. \
\
\
 \
\
                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Schizophrenia Spectron and Other Psychotic Disorders \
\
    9.3 SCHIZOPHRENIA SPECTRUM                   AND \
        OTHER PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS \
\
The disorders in this section are all characterized by abnormalities of one or more of the \
following: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking (speech), disorganized or \
abnormal motor behavior (including catatonia), and negative symptoms. \
\
Delusions are fixed, false beliefs that are unchangeable. The content varies (e.g., \
persecutory, grandiose, somatic) and may be non-bizarre or bizarre. Non-bizarre delusions \
involve situations that are possible (e.g., a person believes he or she has exceptional \
abilities or that his or her spouse is unfaithful), while bizarre delusions are clearly \
implausible (e.g., the person believes that aliens have removed his or her internal organs). \
\
Hallucinations are vivid and clear perceptions that occur without external stimulus. While \
they may occur in any sensory modality, auditory hallucinations are most common in \
schizophrenia and related disorders. Auditory hallucinations tend to be experienced as \
voices that are distinct from one's own thoughts. \
\
Disorganized thinking is usually inferred from speech, in which the person switches from \
one topic to another (derailment or loose associations) or provides answers that diverge \
from questions asked (tangentiality). \
\
Grossly disorganized or abnormal motor behavior (including catatonia) may range from \
childlike "silliness" to unexpected agitation, typically interfering with goal-directed \
behaviors and activities of daily living. Catatonia involves a marked decrease in reactivity \
that ranges from resistance to instructions (negativism), to maintaining odd posture, to lack \
of verbal or motor response (mutism and stupor). Additionally, catatonia can involve \
excessive motor activity (catatonic excitement) or repeated stereotyped movements, \
grimacing, and echoing of speech. Although historically associated with schizophrenia, \
catatonic symptoms may occur in other mental disorders (e.g., bipolar or depressive \
disorders) and in medical conditions. \
\
Negative symptoms that are common in schizophrenia include diminished emotional \
expression (e.g., facial expression, eye contact, intonations of speech, etc., that give \
emotional emphasis to speech) and avolition (decrease in self-initiated purposeful \
activities). Other negative symptoms include alogia (reduced speech output), anhedonia \
(diminished pleasure) and asociality (lack of interest in social interactions). \
\
\
\
                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders \
\
Severity is rated by assessing the primary symptoms of psychosis (delusions, hallucination, \
disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms). Severity \
is specified on a 5-point scale for each symptom, based on presence and strength of the \
symptom from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and severe). \
\
The specifier with catatomia may be coded for any of the psychotic disorders when \
indicated by the presentation. Criteria for catatonia involve a clinical picture that is \
dominated by three or more of the following symptoms: stupor (no psychomotor activity). \
catalepsy (posture is held passively, against gravity), waxy flexibility (resistance to \
positioning by another), mutism (no verbal response), negativism (no response to \
instructions or external stimuli), posturing (actively maintaining a posture against gravity). \
mannerism (caricature of normal actions), stereotypy (repetitive non-goal-directed \
movements), agitation, grimacing, echolalia (mimicking another's speech), or echopraxia \
(imitating another's movement). \
\
>SCHIZOTYPAL PERSONALITY DISORDER This disorder is considered part of the \
schizophrenia spectrum and is also included in the personality disorders section (where \
diagnostic criteria are described). \
\
>DELUSIONAL DISORDER This disorder involves one or more delusions of at least 1 \
month's duration and an absence of additional symptoms found in schizophrenia (e.g., \
hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized or catatonic behavior, or negative \
symptoms). In delusional disorder, apart from the direct impact of the delusions, the \
person's behavior is relatively unimpaired and is not obviously odd. If manic or major \
depressive episodes occur concurrent with the delusion, the duration of the mood episode \
is brief relative to the duration of the delusion. \
\
Specifiers for delusional disorder include: erotomanic type, grandiose type, jealous type, \
persecutory type, somatic type, mixed type, and unspecified type. Erotomanic type involves \
delusions in which another person, usually of higher status, is in love with the individual. \
Grandiose type is characterized by delusions of inflated self-worth, power, knowledge, or \
a special relationship to a deity or famous person. Jealous type involves delusions in which \
the person believes that a sexual partner is being unfaithful. Persecutory type is \
characterized by delusions in which the person is being persecuted or ill treated, which may \
trigger violent behavior. Somatic type involves delusions relating to body functions and \
sensations (e.g., the belief that one emits a foul odor). Mixed type involves characteristics \
of more than one of the above types, without any single theme predominating. Unspecified \
type involves delusions whose themes are not characteristic of any of the above types. \
\
\
 \
\
                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders \
\
Additionally, the specifier with bizarre content is used when the delusion is bizarre (not \
plausible). \
\
The age of onset for delusional disorder is typically in middle to late adulthood, although \
it can occur at a younger age. The most common subtype is persecutory. The functional \
impairment is usually more circumscribed in comparison with other psychotic disorders; \
nevertheless, the impairment may be substantial. \
\
>BRIEF PSYCHOTIC DISORDER Brief psychotic disorder is characterized by one or \
more of the following: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, or grossly \
disorganized or catatonic behavior. The episode lasts anywhere from 1 day to 1 month, \
with eventual return to premorbid levels of functioning. It should be specified as with \
marked stressor, without marked stressor, or with postpartum onset. The specifier with \
catatonia is also used when catatonia is part of the symptom presentation. \
\
>SCHIZOPHRENIFORM DISORDER   The symptoms of schizophreniform disorder \
are identical to schizophrenia, distinguished only by duration. The diagnosis of \
schizophreniform disorder is made when the duration of the illness is at least 1 month but \
less than 6 months. When the person has symptoms for less than 6 months and has not yet \
recovered, the diagnosis is typically schizophreniform disorder (provisional) because if the \
disturbance persists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis is changed to schizophrenia. Specifiers \
include: with good prognostic features and without good prognostic features. Good \
prognostic features include two or more of the following: onset of prominent psychotic \
symptoms within 4 weeks of the first noticeable change in behavior (acute onset), \
confusion or perplexity, good premorbid social and occupational functioning, and absence \
of flat or blunted affect. The specifier with catatonia is also used when catatonia is part of \
the symptom presentation. \
\
>SCHIZOPHRENIA Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia require the presence of two \
or more of the following characteristic symptoms, each present for a significant portion of \
time during a 1-month period: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly \
disorganized or catatonic behavior, and negative symptoms (e.g., diminished emotional \
expression, avolition). At least one of the symptoms must be delusions, hallucinations, or \
disorganized speech. In addition, for a significant portion of time since onset, the person \
must be functioning at a level markedly below previous functioning in such areas as work, \
interpersonal relations, or self-care. Continuous signs of the disturbance must persist for at \
least 6 months, with active symptoms present for at least 1 month. During prodromal or \
residual periods, the signs of disturbance may include only negative symptoms or two or \
more symptoms in attenuated forms (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences). \
\
\
\
                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders \
\
The specifier with catatonia is also used when catatonia is part of the symptom \
presentation. \
\
The age of onset for schizophrenia is typically between the late teens and early 30s, with \
onset prior to adolescence rarely occurring. According to the DSM-5, the median age of \
onset is in the early to mid-20s for men and in the late 20s for women. The onset may be \
abrupt or gradual, and most cases involve a prodromal phase, which is characterized by \
deterioration in overall functioning. The course of schizophrenia is quite variable but full \
remission is rather uncommon. Some individuals with the illness have a course \
characterized by exacerbations and remissions, while others show progressive \
deterioration. \
\
According to the DSM-5, the lifetime prevalence rate of schizophrenia is .3% - . 7%. The \
male to female ratio is about equal. Prognosis is best with good prior functioning, abrupt \
onset, fewer negative symptoms, minimal cognitive impairment, and female gender \
(women tend to have fewer negative symptoms). Later onset has been associated with \
better prognosis. However, the effect of age of onset on prognosis is likely related to gender \
(as females have a later age of onset). Suicide risk is high in individuals with schizophrenia, \
with approximately 5% - 6% committing suicide and about 20% attempting suicide on one \
or more occasions. \
\
First-degree relatives (e.g., siblings) have a concordance rate of 10% and thus have an \
approximately twelve-fold greater risk of developing schizophrenia than does the general \
population. Identical twins have a 50% concordance rate. The risk of developing \
schizophrenia when both parents have the disorder is about 45%. Relatives of individuals \
with schizophrenia also have an increased risk of developing other schizophrenia spectrum \
disorders, including schizotypal and paranoid personality disorder, and delusional disorder. \
\
As measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), brains of persons with schizophrenia \
show enlargement of the lateral and third ventricles, a smaller cerebral cortex, and a smaller \
thalamus (the filter for sensory input). Positron emission tomography (PET) scans indicate \
that individuals with schizophrenia have decreased frontal lobe activity. Frontal lobe \
abnormalities have been associated predominantly with the negative symptoms of \
schizophrenia (e.g., flat affect, avolition). \
\
Medication management is a key component to the effective treatment of schizophrenia \
and is usually life-long. The most commonly used medications are the novel \
antipsychotics, although traditional antipsychotics are still widely used as well. (Please see \
the section of Psychopharmacology for more details.) \
\
\
 \
\
                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders \
\
 A variety of psychosocial interventions have demonstrated effectiveness in treating \
schizophrenia, including cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and family psychoeducation \
(FP). Because expressed emotion (EE) by family members (i.e., criticism, hostility, and \
emotional over-involvement) has been repeatedly shown to predict relapse, many family \
approaches work to decrease EE and focus on the family and patient's strengths and \
resiliency. Social skills training (SST), another well-established evidence-based treatment, \
teaches skills related to communication, assertiveness, disease management and \
independent living. Supported employment, cognitive remediation, and social \
learning/token economy programs have also been found to be highly effective in the \
treatment of individuals with schizophrenia. \
\
>SCHIZOAFFECTIVE DISORDER   Criteria for schizoaffective disorder include an \
uninterrupted period of illness during which there has been a major mood episode (e.g., \
major depressive or manic) concurrent with the symptoms of schizophrenia. In addition, \
during that period of illness, there have been delusions or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks \
without prominent mood symptoms. Furthermore, mood symptoms are present for a \
substantial portion of the total duration of both the active and residual periods. Specifiers \
include: bipolar type or depressive type. Bipolar type applies if a manic episode is part of \
the presentation, whether or not a major depressive occurs. Depressive type applies only if \
major depressive episodes are part of the presentation. The specifier with catatonia is also \
used when symptoms of catatonia are evident. \
\
>SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED PSYCHOTIC DISORDER Substances \
that can induce a psychotic disorder include alcohol, cannabis, hallucinogens (including \
PCP), inhalants, sedatives, hypnotics and anxiolytics, and stimulants (including cocaine). \
\
>PSYCHOTIC DISORDER DUE TO ANOTHER MEDICAL CONDITION Medical \
conditions that are known to manifest with delusions or hallucinations include neurological \
conditions (e.g., neoplasms, migraines, Huntington's disease, epilepsy), endocrine \
 disorders (e.g., hyper- and hypothyroidism), and metabolic conditions (e.g .. \
hypoglycemia). Specifiers include: with delusions or with hallucinations. \
\
>CATATONIC DISORDER DUE TO ANOTHER MEDICAL CONDITION Medical \
conditions that are known to manifest with catatonia include neurological conditions (e.g., \
neoplasms, head trauma, encephalitis) and metabolic conditions (e.g., hypercalcemia. \
diabetic ketoacidosis). \
\
 \
\
                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED SCHIZOPHRENIA SPECTRUM AND \
OTHER PSYCHOTIC DISORDER Examples include persistent auditory hallucinations \
in the absence of any other symptoms and attenuated psychosis syndrome (e.g., psychotic- \
like symptoms below threshold for full psychosis). \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9- DSM-5: Bipolar and Related Disorders \
\
   9.4 BIPOLAR AND RELATED DISORDERS \
\
 Bipolar and related disorders are separated from the depressive disorders in DSM-5. \
\
 Manie episode - Key features of a manic episode include an abnormally elevated, \
 expansive, or irritable mood, as well as increased goal-directed activity or energy that lasts \
 at least 1 week and is present most of the day, nearly every day. Additionally, three or more \
 of the following symptoms are present: inflated self-esteem or grandiosity, decreased need \
for sleep, pressured speech, flight of ideas or racing thoughts, distractibility, increased \
 goal-directed activity (socially, at work, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation (non-goal- \
 directed activity), and excessive involvement in activities that have a high likelihood of \
 adverse consequences (e.g., buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, foolish business \
 investments). The disturbance either causes marked impairment in functioning, \
 necessitates hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic \
 symptoms. There is no minimum duration of symptoms required when hospitalization is \
 necessary. \
\
 Hypomanic episode - A hypomanic episode is a period of elevated, expansive, or irritable \
 mood as well as increased activity or energy that lasts at least 4 days and is present most \
 of the day, nearly every day. Three or more of the following symptoms are present: inflated \
 self-esteem or grandiosity, decreased need for sleep, pressured speech, flight of ideas or \
 racing thoughts, distractibility, increased goal-directed activity or psychomotor agitation, \
 and involvement in activities that have a high likelihood of adverse consequences. The \
 above symptoms are identical to those of a manic episode. The key distinction is that the \
 hypomanic episode is neither severe enough to markedly impair functioning or to \
 necessitate hospitalization, nor are they psychotic symptoms. \
\
 Major depressive episode - A major depressive episode requires the presence of five or \
 more symptoms during a 2-week period that represent a change from previous functioning. \
 At least one of the symptoms must be either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or \
 pleasure. Other symptoms include: weight loss or gain or change in appetite; insomnia or \
 hypersomnia; psychomotor agitation or retardation; fatigue or loss of energy; feelings of \
 worthlessness or guilt; poor concentration or indecisiveness; and recurrent thoughts of \
death or suicidal ideation, intent, or plan. \
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9-DSM-5: Bipolar and Related Disorders \
\
 The mood episode should be specified as mild, moderate, or severe; when full criteria for \
 a mood episode are not met, it should be specified as in partial remission or in full \
 remission. \
\
 Additional specifiers include: with anxious distress, with mixed features, with rapid \
 cycling, with melancholic features, with atypical features, with mood-congruent or mood- \
 incongruent psychotic features, with catatonia, with peripartum onset, and with seasonal \
pattern. \
\
 With anxious distress includes two or more symptoms present most days during the mood \
 episode: feeling keyed up or tense, feeling unusually restless, difficulty concentrating \
 because of worry, fear that something awful may happen, or feeling like the individual \
 might lose control of self. \
\
 With mixed features can apply to a manic, hypomanic, or depressive episode. A manic or \
 hypomanic episode with mixed features includes at least three of the following symptoms \
 present most days during the manic or hypomanic episode: dysphoria or depressed mood, \
 loss of interest of pleasure, psychomotor retardation, fatigue or loss of energy, feelings of \
 worthlessness or guilt, or recurrent thoughts of death or suicidality. Depressive episodes \
 with mixed features include at least three of the following symptoms present most days \
 during the depressive episode: elevated or expansive mood, inflated self-esteem or \
 grandiosity, pressured speech, flight of ideas or racing thoughts, increased energy or goal- \
 directed activity, involvement in activities that have a high likelihood of adverse \
consequences, or decreased need for sleep. \
\
 With rapid eyeling involves the presence of at least four mood episodes in the previous 12 \
months that meet the criteria for manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode. Episodes \
are demarcated by either partial or full remission of at least 2 months or a switch to an \
episode of the opposite pole (e.g., major depressive episode to hypomanic episode). \
\
 With melancholic features involves a near-complete absence of the capacity for pleasure, \
 with three or more of the following: empty mood (despondency), depression that is worse \
 in the morning, early-morning awakening, psychomotor agitation or retardation, significant \
loss of appetite or weight loss, or excessive guilt. \
\
 With atypical features applies to a major depressive episode when there is mood reactivity \
(mood brightens in response to positive events), and two or more of the following: \
significant weight gain or increase in appetite, hypersomnia, leaden feelings in arms or \
\
 \
 \
\
                                 Section 9 -DSM-5: Bipolar and Related Disorders \
\
 legs, or long-standing pattern of sensitivity to interpersonal rejection resulting in \
 social/occupational impairment. \
\
 With mood-congruent or mood-incongruent psychotic features involves the presence of \
 delusions or hallucination at any time in the episode. Mood-congruent features involve \
 delusions and hallucinations consistent with the mood (e.g., themes of grandiosity or \
 invulnerability during a manic episode), while mood-incongruent features occur when the \
 content of the delusions or hallucinations are not consistent with mood. \
\
 With peripartum onset is specified when the onset of the current or most recent mood \
 episode is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks of delivery. \
\
 With seasonal pattern applies when there is a regular temporal relationship between the \
 onset of a mood episode and a particular time of the year (e.g., fall or winter), and full \
 remissions also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression remits in the \
 spring). \
\
>BIPOLAR I DISORDER The essential feature of bipolar I disorder is the occurrence \
 of at least one manic episode. The manic episode may be preceded or followed by \
 hypomanic or major depressive episodes, but other mood episodes are not necessary for \
 the diagnosis. \
\
 The mood episode should be specified as mild, moderate, or severe; when full criteria for \
 a mood episode are not met, it should be specified as in partial remission or in full \
 remission. The current or most recent episode is also specified as manie, hypomanic, \
 depressed, or unspecified. \
\
 Additional specifiers include: with anxious distress, with mixed features, with rapid \
 cycling, with mood-congruent or mood-incongruent psychotic features, with catatonia, \
 with peripartum onset, and with seasonal pattern. \
\
 The lifetime prevalence rate of bipolar disorder is about 1%. Bipolar disorder is equally \
 common in males and females, and more common in high-income than low-income \
 countries. Bipolar disorder has the highest concordance rates of all the major mental \
 disorders; the concordance rates are 80% for identical twins and 20 - 25% for fraternal \
 twins and siblings. The risk of suicide in individuals with bipolar disorder is at least 15 \
 times that of the general population. Bipolar disorder may account for 25% of all completed \
 suicides. \
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9-DSM-5: Bipolar and Related Disorders \
\
 Mean age of onset for the first manie, hypomanic, or depressive episode is 18 years. Bipolar \
 disorder is typically recurrent; more than 90% of people who have had a single manic \
 episode go on to have future mood episodes. Research has indicated that stressors play \
 more of a role in precipitating the first and/or second episodes of the disorder than \
 subsequent episodes. Medication management for bipolar disorder is typically lifelong and \
 commonly prescribed medications include Lithium, Tegretol, or Depakene (valproic acid). \
 Psychoeducation (providing information about bipolar disorder with the goal of improving \
 adherence to medications) has strong research support. \
\
 >BIPOLAR II DISORDER Bipolar II disorder is diagnosed when there has been at least \
 one major depressive episode and at least one hypomanic episode. Additionally, there has \
 never been a manic episode. \
\
 The mood episode should be specified as mild, moderate, or severe; when full criteria for \
 a mood episode are not met, it should be specified as in partial remission or in full \
 remission. The current or most recent episode is also specified as hypomanic or depressed. \
\
 Additional specifiers include: with anxious distress, with mixed features, with rapid \
 cycling, with mood-congruent or mood-incongruent psychotic features, with catatonia, \
 with peripartum onset, and with seasonal pattern. \
\
 The average age of onset for bipolar II disorder is mid-20s (later age than bipolar I \
 disorder). Bipolar II disorder appears to be more common in women than men. The risk of \
 bipolar II disorder is highest among relatives of people with bipolar II disorder. \
\
 >CYCLOTHYMIC DISORDER    Cyclothymic disorder includes the presence of \
 numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms and numerous periods of depressive symptoms, \
 over the course of at least 2 years (1 year in children and adolescents). During the 2-year \
 period, the hypomanic and depressive periods have been present at least half the time, and \
 the person has not been without symptoms for more than 2 months at a time. Criteria for a \
 major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have never been met. Additionally. \
 symptoms must cause significant distress or impairment in functioning. The specifier with \
 anxious distress is coded when indicated. \
\
 >SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED   BIPOLAR    AND   RELATED \
 DISORDER Substances that can induce a bipolar and related disorder include stimulants, \
 phencyclidine (PCP), and steroids. \
\
 \
 \
\
                                Section 9-DSM-5: Bipolar and Related Disorders \
\
>BIPOLAR AND RELATED DISORDER DUE TO ANOTHER MEDICAL \
CONDITION Medical conditions that may cause a bipolar manic or hypomanic condition \
include hyperthyroidism, Cushing's disease, multiple sclerosis, stroke, and traumatic brain \
injury. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED BIPOLAR AND RELATED DISORDER \
Examples include hypomanic episode without a prior major depressive episode, or short- \
duration cyclothymia (less than 24 months). \
\
\
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Depressive Disorders \
\
          9.5 DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS \
\
The depressive disorders all involve sad, empty, or irritable mood, along with somatic and \
cognitive changes that significantly affect functioning. \
\
>DISRUPTIVE MOOD    DYSREGULATION DISORDER    Disruptive mood \
dysregulation disorder involves recurrent temper outbursts (verbal or physical), occurring \
on average three or more times a week for over 1 year, in at least two settings. Additionally. \
between temper outbursts, the mood is persistently irritable or angry most of the day, nearly \
every day. The diagnosis must not be made before age 6 or after age 18 and the symptoms \
must have been present before age 10. The diagnosis requires that there has never been a \
period of more than 1 day in which the symptoms of a manic or hypomanic episode have \
been present. \
\
>MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Major depressive disorder requires the presence \
of a major depressive episode, characterized by five or more symptoms during a 2-week \
period that represent a change from previous functioning. At least one of the symptoms \
must be either (a) depressed mood or (b) loss of interest or pleasure. Other symptoms \
include: weight loss or gain, or change in appetite; insomnia or hypersomnia; psychomotor \
agitation or retardation; fatigue or loss of energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; poor \
concentration or indecisiveness; and recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation, intent, \
or plan. Additionally, the diagnosis requires that the person has never experienced a manic \
or hypomanic episode. \
\
The DSM-5 notes that normal response to significant loss (e.g., bereavement, serious \
medical illness, natural disaster) may include intense sadness, insomnia, loss of appetite, \
and rumination. A key distinction between grief and a major depressive episode (MDE) is \
that in grief, feelings of emptiness and loss predominate, while in MDE there is a persistent \
depressed mood and inability to experience pleasure. Additionally, the dysphoria in grief \
tends to occur in waves, associated with thoughts of the loss, rather than being persistent. \
Themes in MDE include feelings of self-loathing, worthlessness, and wanting to end one's \
life due to inadequacy (e.g., feeling undeserving, unable to cope); these themes are not \
typically seen with grief and loss. The presence of a major depressive episode in addition \
to the normal response to loss should be considered and diagnosed when appropriate. \
\
When full criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met, major depressive \
disorder is coded with the specifiers of mild, moderate, or severe. When full criteria for a \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Depressive Disorders \
\
major depressive episode are not met, course is specified as either in partial remission or \
in full remission. \
\
Additional specifiers include: with anxious distress, with mixed features, with melancholic \
features, with atypical features, with mood-congruent or mood-incongruent psychotic \
features, with catatonia, with peripartum onset, and with seasonal pattern. \
\
Major depressive disorder, with peripartum onset is thought to occur in about 10% to 15% \
of new mothers. Symptoms include severe anxiety, irritability, insomnia, lack of interest \
in the infant, guilt, suicidal ideation, and poor concentration, as well as weepiness and \
sadness. These symptoms can continue for months if untreated. In contrast, postpartum \
blues (or baby blues) are much more widespread, occurring in 50% - 80% of mothers just \
after delivery. The symptoms are less severe and relatively short-lived. Postpartum blues \
involve crying, irritability, poor sleep, weeping, and a sense of emotional vulnerability. \
Typically, postpartum blues begin in the first week after birth, and last no longer than a \
few weeks. There is no DSM-5 diagnosis for postpartum blues. Postpartum psychosis is \
relatively rare, occurring in .2% of the population. It is characterized by hallucinations \
(e.g., command hallucinations to kill the infant) or delusions (e.g., beliefs that the baby is \
possessed or has special powers). It is typically coded as brief psychotic disorder, with \
postpartum onset. \
\
Major depressive disorder can begin at any age, although incidence peaks in the 20s. The \
course of major depressive disorder is variable, with some individuals rarely experiencing \
remission, and others experiencing isolated episodes with full return to premorbid \
functioning between episodes. Recovery commonly begins within 3 months of onset for 2 \
out of 5 individuals and within 1 year for 4 out of 5 individuals. Factors associated with \
lower recovery rates include current episode duration, psychotic features, prominent \
anxiety, personality disorders, and symptom severity. Risk of recurrence is higher when \
the preceding episode was severe, in younger individuals, or in persons who have had \
multiple episodes. \
\
The rate of major depressive disorder is equal in prepubertal girls and boys; it is 1.5 to 3 \
times higher in females than in males beginning in early adolescence. Concordance rates \
are 55 - 60% for identical twins and 20% for fraternal twins and siblings. Risk factors for \
major depressive disorder include neuroticism (negative affectivity), adverse childhood \
experiences, and stressful life events (which may precipitate a major depressive episode). \
The possibility of suicide exists at all times during major depressive episode. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Depressive Disorders \
\
Other disorders that are commonly comorbid with major depressive disorder include \
substance-related disorders, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, anorexia \
nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and borderline personality disorder. \
\
Treatment for Major Depressive Disorder \
\
There are many evidence-based treatments for depression; among the most prominent are \
cognitive therapy, interpersonal therapy, behavior therapy/behavioral activation, and self- \
management/self-control therapy. Behavioral activation has been shown to be just as \
effective as medication in treating depression and more effective than cognitive therapy in \
treating severe depression. \
\
Medications are also frequently used in the treatment of depression. (For a detailed \
discussion of these medications, refer to the Psychopharmacology section.) \
\
Suicide \
\
According to the most recent data from the Centers for Disease Control (2010), suicide is \
the 10th leading cause of death for all people in the U.S. The suicide rate for men is four \
times higher than that of women, although a higher percentage of women report suicidal \
thoughts and women attempt suicide three times as often. \
\
Suicide rates differ among age ranges and ethnic groups. Rates are reported per 100,000. \
A significant shift has recently taken place in that the highest rates of suicide are now found \
among those 45 to 64 years of age (18.63), the next highest rates are found among those \
who are 85 years or older (17.62), with all other age ranges significantly lower (< 15.00). \
The suicide rate is lowest among those 15 - 24 years of age (10.54). \
\
In terms of ethnic groups in the U.S., the suicide rate is highest among Whites (14.13) \
followed by Native Americans (11.00). A much lower and fairly equivalent rate (<6.5) \
occurs among Asians, African Americans, and Hispanics. Overall, suicide rates are highest \
in the western states. \
\
Ninety percent of people who commit suicide have a mental disorder, most often a mood \
disorder, schizophrenia, a personality disorder, or substance use disorder. Expressions of \
hopelessness are a stronger predictor of suicide than the presence and severity of \
depression. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 9 -DSM-5: Depressive Disorders \
\
The single best predictor of completed suicide is a history of serious suicide attempts, with \
the greatest risk occurring within the days and weeks immediately following a \
hospitalization. In addition to a mental disorder and a past suicide attempt, the most \
frequently cited risk factors include being male, being single or living alone, a family \
history of suicide, and chronic pain or chronic illness. \
\
>PERSISTENT DEPRESSIVE DISORDER (DYSTHYMIA) This disorder is \
diagnosed when there is a depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, for \
at least 2 years (1 year in children and adolescents). While depressed, the person \
experiences two or more of the following symptoms: change in appetite, insomnia or \
hypersomnia, low energy or fatigue, low self-esteem, poor concentration or difficulty \
making decisions, and feelings of hopelessness. These symptoms cause significant distress \
or impairment in functioning. During the 2-year period the person has not been without \
symptoms for more than 2 months at a time. Criteria for a major depressive episode may \
be continuously present for 2 years. Additionally, there has never been a manic or \
hypomanic episode, and criteria for cyclothymia have not been met. \
\
Specifiers for persistent depressive disorder include: early onset (onset before age 21) or \
late onset (at age 21 or older); severity level of mild, moderate, or severe; and in partial \
remission or in full remission. \
\
For the most recent 2 years of the disorder, the clinician must specify: with pure dysthymic \
syndrome (no MDE), with persistent major depressive episode (full criteria for MDE met \
during preceding 2 years); with intermittent major depressive episode, with current episode \
(current MDE with periods of 8 weeks or more with symptoms below threshold for MDE); \
and with intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode (no current MDE. \
but one or more MDE in the preceding 2 years). \
\
Additional specifiers include: with anxious distress, with mixed features, with melancholic \
features, with atypical features, with mood-congruent or mood-incongruent psychotic \
features, and with peripartum onset. \
\
Persistent depressive disorder often has an early and insidious onset and, by definition, a \
chronic course. Early onset (e.g., before age 21) is associated with higher likelihood of \
comorbid personality disorders and substance use disorders. \
\
>PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER This disorder is diagnosed when in \
the majority of menstrual cycles there are at least five symptoms present in the week before \
the onset of menses, symptoms start to improve within a few days after the onset of menses, \
\
\
\
                                    Section 9 - DSM-5: Depressive Disorders \
\
and symptoms are minimal or absent in the week postmenses. At least one of the following \
must be present: marked affective lability, marked irritability or increased interpersonal \
conflict, marked depressed mood, or marked anxiety. Additionally, at least one of the \
following must be present (to reach a total of five symptoms): decreased interest in usual \
activities, difficulty concentrating, lethargy or fatigue, change in appetite, insomnia or \
hypersomnia, feeling overwhelmed, and physical symptoms (e.g., breast tenderness, \
joint/muscle pain, bloating, or weight gain). These symptoms must be present for most \
menstrual cycles in the preceding year. \
\
>SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Substances \
that can induce a depressive disorder include alcohol, hallucinogens (including PCP). \
inhalants, opioids, sedatives, hypnotics and anxiolyties, and stimulants (including cocaine). \
\
>DEPRESSIVE DISORDER DUE TO ANOTHER MEDICAL CONDITION \
Medical conditions that are known to manifest with symptoms of depression include stroke, \
Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, and traumatic brain injury. Additionally, the \
neuroendocrine conditions of hypothyroidism and Cushing's disease are associated with \
depression. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIC/UNSPECIFIED DEPRESSIVE DISORDER Examples of other \
specified depressive disorder include short duration depressive episode (4 - 13 days), or \
depressive episode with insufficient symptoms (depressed affect with at least one of the \
other eight symptoms, for at least 2 weeks). \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 9 - DSM-5: Anxiety Disorders \
\
             9.6 ANXIETY DISORDERS \
\
Anxiety disorders typically include both fear and anxiety. Fear is an emotional response to \
a real or perceived emotional threat, and is often associated with increased autonomic \
arousal, escape behaviors (e.g., fight or flight), and even panic attacks. Anxiety is the \
anticipation of a future threat, and is often associated with muscle tension, vigilance in \
anticipation of future danger, and avoidant behaviors. \
\
Many anxiety disorders develop in childhood and tend to persist if untreated. Most occur \
more frequently in females (about 2:1 ratio). The anxiety disorders section is arranged \
developmentally, with disorders sequenced based on typical age of onset. \
\
Panic attacks are discrete period of intense fear or discomfort that develop abruptly and \
reach a peak within ten minutes accompanied by four or more physical and/or cognitive \
symptoms: palpitations or pounding heart, sweating, trembling, sensations of shortness of \
breath, feeling of choking, chest pain, nausea or abdominal distress, feeling dizzy or \
lightheaded, chills or heat sensations, numbing or tingling (paresthesias), derealization or \
depersonalization, fear of losing control or going crazy, and fear of dying. Panic attacks \
may be expected (e.g., a response to a typically feared situation) or unexpected (e.g., \
occurring for no apparent reason). Limited-symptom panic attacks are panic attacks with \
fewer than four symptoms. \
\
In the DSM-5, panic attacks may be used as a specifier for any anxiety disorder as well as \
other mental disorders (e.g., depressive and psychotic disorders). Panic attacks that co- \
occur with another mental disorder are associated with increased symptom severity, higher \
rates of suicidality, and poorer treatment response. \
\
>SEPARATION ANXIETY DISORDER    This disorder is characterized by a \
developmentally inappropriate and excessive anxiety concerning being away from home \
or away from the person(s) to whom the individual is attached. Criteria include three or \
more of the following: distress when separation occurs or is anticipated, worry about harm \
befalling one's major attachment figure(s), worry about getting lost or kidnapped, \
reluctance to go out (e.g., school or work refusal) because of fear of separation, \
reluctance/fear of being alone without the major attachment figure, reluctance/refusal to go \
to sleep without being near one's major attachment figure(s), repeated nightmares about \
separation, and repeated physical complaints when separation occurs or is anticipated. The \
\
\
\
                                       Section 9 - DSM-5: Anxiety Disorders \
\
duration of the disturbance must be at least 4 weeks in children and adolescents, and \
typically 6 months or more in adults. Separation anxiety disorder is the most prevalent \
anxiety disorder in children younger than 12 years. \
\
Separation anxiety disorder frequently develops after life stress, especially after a \
significant loss. The most common evidence-based treatment for separation anxiety \
disorder is cognitive-behavioral therapy, often including the parents. Family therapy is \
sometimes used as well. When school refusal is present, this diagnosis should only be \
considered if the school refusal is due to a fear of separation from attachment figures; the \
goal is then to return the child to school as soon as possible. \
\
>SELECTIVE MUTISM Selective mutism involves a consistent failure to speak in \
specific social situations when speaking is expected, in spite of speaking in other situations. \
As a result, this disturbance interferes with educational or occupational achievement, or \
with social communication. A minimum of 1 month's duration is required for the diagnosis. \
Onset is usually before age 5. \
\
The failure to speak in children with selective mutism (SM) is related to fear and anxiety, \
not willfulness or disobedience. Typical psychosocial treatments include some \
combination of behavioral therapy and cognitive therapy. Behavioral therapy usually \
includes desensitization and relaxation protocols, of which guided imagery is sometimes a \
part. \
\
>SPECIFIC PHOBIA A specific phobia involves a marked fear or anxiety caused by \
the presence or anticipation of a specific object or situation. Exposure to the stimulus \
provokes an immediate anxiety response (which may include a panic attack) and the phobic \
situation is either avoided or endured with intense distress. The fear or anxiety is out of \
proportion to the actual danger, and typically lasts for 6 months or more. \
\
Specifiers are based on the phobic stimulus and include: animal, natural environment (e.g., \
heights, storms), blood-injection-injury, situational (e.g., airplanes, elevators), or other \
(e.g., loud sounds, costined characters). It is common for individuals to have multiple \
specific phobias (e.g., 75% of individuals with specific phobias fear more than one \
situation or object), in which case multiple diagnoses are given. \
\
A blood-injection-injury phobia differs from other phobias in that with a blood-injection- \
injury phobia the initial physiological response to the phobic stimulus is an increase in \
heart rate followed by a decrease in heart rate. With other phobias the physiological \
response to the phobic stimulus is a sustained elevated heart rate. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 9-DSM-5: Anxiety Disorders \
\
Individuals with specific phobias are at increased risk for developing other anxiety \
disorders, depressive and bipolar disorders, substance-related disorders, somatic symptom \
and related disorders, or personality disorders (especially dependent personality disorder). \
\
Exposure-based therapies are the treatment of choice for specific phobias. In-vivo exposure \
usually yields the strongest results; massed exposure may result in more robust clinical \
improvements. Therapist-assisted exposure-based procedures (e.g., participant modeling, \
guided mastery) are highly effective. Virtual reality exposure is useful for phobias that may \
be difficult to treat in-vivo (e.g., flying phobia). Systematic desensitization, which involves \
pairing exposure with relaxation, may be preferred by patients who cannot tolerate or who \
are unwilling to try in-vivo exposure. Systematic desensitization is typically an effective \
treatment but requires more time and is less successful at decreasing avoidance. Many \
exposure therapies also include a cognitive component, which can be particularly helpful \
for certain phobias (e.g., claustrophobia, dental phobia). \
\
>SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER (SOCIAL PHOBIA) Social anxiety disorder \
involves fear of one or more social situations in which the person is exposed to potential \
scrutiny by others. Examples include social interactions (e.g., conversations), being \
observed (e.g., eating or drinking in front of others), and performing (e.g., giving a speech). \
The person fears his or her behavior will be embarrassing, humiliating, or lead to rejection. \
The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting 6 months or more. If the fear \
is restricted to speaking or performing in public, the specifier performance only should be \
used. \
\
There is strong research support for treating social anxiety disorder with cognitive therapy \
and with behavioral approaches (including exposure and relaxation). Combining cognitive \
and behavior therapies (e.g., CBT) seems to yield the best results. \
\
>PANIC DISORDER Panic disorder is characterized by recurrent unexpected panic \
attacks. At least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 month or more of one or both of \
the following: persistent concern about having additional panic attacks or their \
consequences (e.g., losing control, having a heart attack, going crazy) or a significant \
change in behavior related to the attacks. \
\
Panic attacks and a diagnosis of panic disorder are related to higher rates of suicide, even \
when comorbidity and other risk factors are taken into account. Concordance rates for \
panic disorder are 20% - 30% among monozygotic twins and 0% - 10% for dizygotic twins. \
The prevalence of panic disorder is higher in individuals with other anxiety disorder \
\
\
\
                                       Section 9 - DSM-5: Anxiety Disorders \
\
(especially agoraphobia), major depression, bipolar disorder, and possible alcohol use \
disorder. Panic disorder is comorbid with a number of medical symptoms and conditions \
including dizziness, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperthyroidism, asthma, COPD, and irritable \
bowel syndrome. \
\
Cognitive behavioral therapy is considered the evidence-based treatment of choice for \
panic disorder. Treatment generally includes psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, in- \
vivo exposure to situations that are avoided or give rise to panic, and interoceptive exposure \
to aversive physiological sensations. Relaxation training or breathing retraining is \
sometimes included as well. A particularly well-known package for treatment of panic \
disorder is Panic Control Treatment (PCT) developed by David Barlow. \
\
>AGORAPHOBIA Agoraphobia involves intense fear or anxiety about two or more \
situations: using public transportation, being in open spaces, being in enclosed spaces, \
standing in line or being in a crowd, or being outside the home. These situations are avoided \
because of thoughts that escape might be difficult (e.g., "can't get out of here") or that help \
might not be available when incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., incontinence, \
vomiting, panic-like symptoms) occur. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, \
typically lasting for 6 months or more. \
\
The majority of individuals with agoraphobia also have comorbid mental disorders. The \
most common co-occurring diagnoses include other anxiety disorders (e.g., specific \
phobias, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder), depressive disorders, PTSD, and alcohol \
use disorder. \
\
Agoraphobia is typically treated with cognitive behavioral therapy, in a manner largely \
similar to the treatment of panic disorder. \
\
>GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER Generalized anxiety disorder is diagnosed \
when there is excessive anxiety and worry about a number of events or activities, occurring \
more days than not for at least 6 months. The anxiety is associated with three or more of \
the following six symptoms: restlessness, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, irritability, \
muscle tension, and sleep disturbance. Only one symptom is required in children. \
\
The median age of onset for generalized anxiety disorder is 30 years, which is later than \
for all the other anxiety disorders. This disorder is usually chronic, with a fluctuating course \
during which symptoms wax and wane. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 9-DSM-5: Anxiety Disorders \
\
Both behavioral approaches (e.g., relaxation training, scheduled "worry time," pleasurable \
activities, controlled exposure) and cognitive approaches have been shown to be effective \
for generalized anxiety disorder. Some evidence suggests that the combination of both \
(e.g., CBT or Anxiety Management Training) may be superior to either by itself. Anxiety \
Management Training is a combination of relaxation and cognitive restructuring. \
\
>SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED ANXIETY DISORDER Substances that \
can induce an anxiety disorder include: alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, hallucinogens \
(including PCP), inhalants, opioids, sedatives, hypnotics or anxiolytics, and stimulants \
(including cocaine). \
\
>ANXIETY DISORDER DUE TO ANOTHER MEDICAL CONDITION Medical \
conditions that are known to manifest with symptoms of anxiety include endocrine \
disorders (e.g., hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia), cardiovascular disorders (e.g., congestive \
heart failure, arrhythmia) respiratory illness (e.g., asthma, COPD), metabolic disturbances \
(e.g., vitamin B12 deficiency), and neurological illness (e.g., seizure disorders). \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED ANXIETY DISORDER Examples include \
generalized anxiety not occurring more days than not, ataque de nervios (attack of nerves) \
or khyal cap (panic-like attacks, in which there is concern that a windlike substance may \
rise in the body causing damage). \
\
\
\
                         Section 9 - DSM-5: Obsessive Compulsive and Related Disorders \
\
9.7 OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE AND RELATED \
                     DISORDERS \
\
The obsessive-compulsive and related disorders section begins with obsessive-compulsive \
disorder (OCD), characterized by obsessions and/or compulsions. It then covers related \
disorders of body dysmorphic disorder and hoarding disorder, characterized by cognitive \
symptoms (e.g., perceived defects in appearance, perceived need to save possessions), and \
trichotillomania and excoriation, characterized by recurrent body-focused repetitive \
behaviors (e.g., hair-pulling and skin-picking). \
\
>OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) \
involves either obsessions and/or compulsions. Obsessions are described as recurrent \
thoughts (e.g., of contamination), urges (e.g., to stab someone), or images (e.g., of violent \
scenes) that are experienced as intrusive and cause distress or anxiety. The person attempts \
to either ignore or suppress the thoughts or to neutralize them with some other thought or \
action. Compulsions are described as repetitive behaviors (e.g., checking, hand-washing) \
or mental acts (e.g., praying, counting) the person feels driven to perform to cope with an \
obsession or to comply with rigid rules. These behaviors or mental acts are an attempt to \
prevent or reduce distress or prevent some dreaded situation. The obsessions or \
compulsions are time-consuming (e.g., take more than 1 hour per day) or cause significant \
distress or impairment. \
\
Specifiers include: with good or fair insight, with poor insight, and with absent \
insight/delusional beliefs. Additionally, the specifier tic-related is coded if the individual \
has a current or past history of a tic disorder. \
\
Males have an earlier age of onset of OCD than females, with nearly 25% of males having \
an onset before age 10. As a result, males are more commonly affected in childhood. Males \
are also more likely to have a comorbid tic disorder. In adulthood, females are slightly \
more commonly affected. Suicide risk is high in individuals with OCD, with suicidal \
thoughts occurring in as many as 50% of affected persons, and suicide attempts occurring \
in 25% of affected persons. \
\
Evidence-based treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder include exposure with \
response prevention and cognitive therapy. The two approaches are often combined. \
\
\
 \
\
                         Section 9 - DSM-5: Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders \
\
>BODY DYSMORPHIC DISORDER    In body dysmorphic disorder, the person is \
preoccupied with one or more perceived defects in appearance (e.g., related to the skin. \
hair, or nose). The perceived flaws are either not observable or slight. Excessive repetitive \
behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, grooming) or mental acts (e.g., comparing oneself to \
others) are performed. \
\
Specifiers include: with good or fair insight, with poor insight, and with absent \
insight/delusional beliefs. Additionally, the specifier with muscle dysmorphna is coded if \
the individual is preoccupied with the idea that his or her body build is too small or not \
muscular enough. \
\
Body dysmorphic disorder usually starts in adolescence and occurs slightly more \
frequently in women than in men. Rates of suicidal ideation and attempts are high for \
individuals with this disorder. Major depressive disorder is the most common comorbid \
disorder, with social anxiety disorder and substance-related disorders also common. \
Treatment for body dysmorphic disorder typically includes CBT and medications (e.g., \
SSRIs). \
\
>HOARDING DISORDER Hoarding disorder involves persistent difficulty throwing \
out or giving up possessions, regardless of actual value. The difficulty is due to a perceived \
need to save items and distress associated with discarding items, which results in a cluttered \
living space. \
\
Specifiers include: with good or fair insight, with poor insight, and with absent \
insight/delusional beliefs. Additionally, the specifier with excessive acquisition is coded if \
in addition to difficulty discarding there is excessive acquisition of items that are not \
needed or for which there is no space. \
\
>TRICHOTILLOMANIA Trichotillomania involves recurrent pulling out of one's own \
hairs (most typically from the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelids), resulting in noticeable hair \
loss, with repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling. \
\
>EXCORIATION (SKIN-PICKING) DISORDER Excoriation disorder is recurrent \
picking at one's own skin (most typically the face, arms, and hands) resulting in skin \
lesions, with repeated attempts to decrease or stop picking. \
\
>SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED   OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE AND \
RELATED DISORDER Substances that can induce an obsessive-compulsive and related \
disorder include amphetamines (or other stimulants) and cocaine. \
\
\
\
                         Section 9-DSM-5: Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders \
\
>OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE AND RELATED DISORDER DUE TO ANOTHER \
MEDICAL CONDITION Medical conditions that are known to manifest with symptoms \
of obsessive-compulsive and related disorders include Sydenham's chorea and pediatric \
acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS). \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE AND \
RELATED DISORDER Examples include body dysmorphic-like disorder without \
repetitive behaviors, obsessional jealousy, and koro (intense anxiety that the penis or \
vulva/nipples will recede into the body, possibly leading to death). \
\
\
 \
\
                            Section 9 - DSM-5: Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders \
\
   9.8 TRAUMA- AND STRESSOR-RELATED \
                     DISORDERS \
\
The trauma- and stressor-related disorders all include the diagnostic criterion of exposure \
to a traumatic or stressful event. Symptoms of psychological distress following exposure \
vary, and many manifest as anxiety- or fear-based symptoms, anhedonic and dysphoric \
symptoms, externalizing and aggressive symptoms, or dissociative symptoms. \
\
>REACTIVE ATTACHMENT DISORDER     The hallmark of this disorder is a \
consistent pattern of inhibited, emotionally withdrawn behavior toward the caregiver, as \
manifest by the child rarely seeking or responding to comfort when distressed. \
Additionally, the child exhibits at least two of the following: minimally responsive to \
others, limited positive affect, or episodes of unexplained sadness, fear, or irritation. The \
child has also experienced grossly insufficient care (e.g., repeated changes of primary \
caregivers, rearing in an institution with high child-to-caregiver ratios). The disturbance is \
present before age 5, and the child has a developmental age of at least 9 months. The \
specifier of persistent is to be given when the disorder is present for more than 12 months. \
and severe when a child exhibits all symptoms of the disorder, with each symptom at a \
high level. \
\
>DISINHIBITED SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT DISORDER      The hallmark of \
disinhibited social engagement disorder is behavior in which a child actively approaches \
and interacts with adult strangers and exhibits at least two of the following: lack of \
hesitation in approaching unfamiliar adults, overly familiar behavior with strangers that \
violate cultural social boundaries, lack of checking back with the adult caregiver after \
venturing away, and willingness to go off with an unfamiliar adult without hesitation, The \
child has also experienced extremely insufficient care (e.g., repeated changes of primary \
caregivers, rearing in an institution with high child-to-caregiver ratios) and has a \
developmental age of at least 9 months. The specifier of persistent is to be given when the \
disorder is present for more than 12 months, and severe when a child exhibits all symptoms \
of the disorder, with each symptom at a high level. \
\
>POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD) An individual with this disorder \
has been exposed to a traumatic event (actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual \
violence) in one or more of the following ways: directly experiencing the event, witnessing \
the event occurring to others, learning that a traumatic event occurred to a close family \
\
\
\
                            Section 9 - DSM-5: Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders \
\
member, or experiencing repeated exposure to aversive details of traumatic events (e.g .. \
first responders, police officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse). The four \
characteristic symptoms include: intrusive symptoms (e.g., re-experiencing the trauma \
through dreams, recollections, dissociation/flashbacks), avoidance of stimuli associated \
with the trauma (e.g., avoiding memories, thoughts, or external reminders), negative \
alterations in cognitions and mood (e.g., inability to remember the event, distorted \
cognitions about the event, fear, guilt, shame), and increased arousal (e.g., irritability, \
reckless behavior, hypervigilance). In children 6 years and younger, the three characteristic \
symptoms include: intrusive symptoms, avoidance and/or negative alterations in cognitions \
and mood, and increased arousal. Symptoms must last for more than 1 month. The disorder \
may be specified as with dissociative symptoms (recurrent depersonalization or \
derealization), and with delayed expression if onset of symptoms was at least 6 months \
after the event. \
\
The duration of symptoms of PTSD varies widely, with complete recovery within 3 months \
occurring in 50% of individuals with PTSD. For others, symptoms last longer than 12 \
months, or sometimes more than 50 years. Risk factors for the development of PTSD \
include severity of the trauma, perceived life threat, interpersonal violence (e.g., a child \
witnessing a threat to the caregiver), prior mental disorders, dissociation during and after \
the trauma, lack of social support, female gender, younger age, lower SES, lower \
education, lower intelligence, and minority racial/ethnic status. PTSD is more prevalent \
among females than males and is associated with suicidal ideation and attempts. \
\
Evidence-based interventions for PTSD include cognitive processing therapy (CPT), \
prolonged exposure (PE), seeking safety (for PTSD with co-morbid substance use \
disorder), and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). EMDR is \
considered an effective treatment but its efficacy is controversial, as the mechanism of \
change may simply be exposure. The eye movements or other bilateral stimulation, which \
were originally believed to be the curative factors in EMDR, have been shown to have no \
unique effects and to make no contribution to overall effectiveness. As a treatment for \
PTSD, stress inoculation therapy is considered to have modest research support. \
\
The technique of psychological debriefing (PD), originally touted as a method to prevent \
the development of PTSD and other trauma-related symptoms, had been used widely after \
disasters, such as 9/11. However, the current consensus is that the method is ineffective; \
some research has even indicated that the technique makes recovery more difficult as \
compared to having no treatment at all. \
\
\
 \
\
                            Section 9 - DSM-5: Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders \
\
>ACUTE STRESS DISORDER This disorder involves a person who has been exposed \
to the same type of traumatic event that causes PTSD, and evidences nine or more \
symptoms from any of five categories of intrusion, negative mood, dissociation, avoidance, \
and arousal. While symptoms typically begin immediately after the trauma, the disturbance \
must persist for at least 3 days and up to 1 month. \
\
>ADJUSTMENT DISORDERS Adjustment disorders involve the presence of emotional \
or behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable psychosocial stressor. The disorder \
develops within 3 months of the onset of the stressor and remits within 6 months of the \
stressor's termination. The symptoms are clinically significant in that the person \
experiences marked distress in excess of what would be expected or there is significant \
impairment in functioning. Adjustment disorder is only diagnosed if the stress-related \
disturbance does not qualify for another mental disorder, nor is it an exacerbation of a \
preexisting mental disorder. Adjustment disorder specifiers include: with depressed mood, \
with anxiety, with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, with disturbance of conduct, with \
mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, and unspecified. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED TRAUMA AND STRESSOR- RELATED \
DISORDER Examples of other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder include \
adjustment-like disorders with delayed onset of symptoms that occur more than 3 months \
after the stressor, persistent complex bereavement disorder, or ataque de nervios (attack of \
nerves). \
\
\
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Dissociative Der \
\
         9.9 DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS \
\
Dissociative disorders involve a disturbance or alteration in the normally integrative \
functions of consciousness, identity, memory, perception, emotion, body representation. \
motor control. and behavior. The disturbance may be experienced as intrusions into \
awareness and behavior (e.g., "positive" dissociative symptoms such as derealization). \
and/or as an inability to access information (e.g., "negative" dissociative symptoms such \
as amnesia). Dissociative disorders frequently occur following a trauma. \
\
>DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER This hallmark of dissociative identity \
disorder is the presence of two or more distinct identities or personalities (which may be \
viewed in some cultures as "possession"). The disruption in identity involves discontinuity \
in sense of self, frequently with accompanying alterations in affect, behavior, \
consciousness, memory, perception, cognition, and/or sensory-motor functioning. There is \
also an inability to recall everyday events, important personal information, and/or traumatic \
events that is too extensive to be explained by forgetfulness. \
\
>DISSOCIATIVE AMNESIA This disorder is characterized by the inability to recall \
important personal information, usually of a traumatic or stressful nature, that cannot be \
explained by ordinary forgetfulness. The amnesia is most commonly selective for a specific \
event or events, rather than generalized amnesia for one's identity and life history. The \
specifier with dissociative fugue is used when the disorder includes purposeful travel or \
bewildered wandering, with an inability to recall one's past. \
\
>DEPERSONALIZATION/DEREALIZATION DISORDER This disorder involves \
persistent or recurrent episodes of depersonalization (a sense of unreality or detachment \
from one's thoughts, feelings, body, or actions) or derealization (a sense of unreality or \
detachment from one's surroundings). Reality testing remains intact during the experience. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED DISSOCIATIVE DISORDER Examples of \
other specified/unspecified dissociative disorder include identity disturbance due to \
prolonged and intense coercive persuasion, or acute dissociative reactions to stressful \
events (sometimes lasting only a few hours or days). \
\
\
 \
\
                            Section 9 - DSM 5: Somatte Symptom and Related Disorders \
\
  9.10 SOMATIC SYMPTOM              AND RELATED \
                     DISORDERS \
\
The common feature of the somatic symptom and related disorders is the prominence of \
somatic symptoms associated with significant distress and impairment. Individuals with \
prominent somatic symptoms are more commonly encountered in primary care and other \
medical settings than in psychiatric and mental health settings. Previous diagnostic criteria \
for somatoform disorders overemphasized medically unexplained symptoms; this was \
unhelpful, unreliable, and frequently seen as pejorative. DSM-5 classification highlights \
distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response \
to the symptoms. \
\
>SOMATIC SYMPTOM DISORDER   Somatie symptom disorder is characterized by \
one or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of \
daily life. Additionally, the individual evidences excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors \
related to the somatic symptoms as manifest by at least one of the following: persistent \
thoughts about the seriousness of one's symptoms, persistent high levels of anxiety about \
health or symptoms, or excessive time and energy devoted to symptoms or health concerns. \
While the somatic symptom(s) may not be present continuously, the worries are persistent \
(typically more than 6 months). \
\
Specifiers include: with predominant pain (when the somatic symptoms predominantly \
involve pain), and persistent (severe symptoms, marked impairment, and long duration). \
Additionally, current severity is coded as: mild, moderate, or severe. \
\
According to the DSM-5, the prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is likely to be higher \
among females than males. Persistence of symptoms is associated with demographic \
variables (female gender, older age, less education, lower SES), history of abuse, \
concurrent physical or psychiatric disorder, social stress, and reinforcing factors (e.g., \
illness benefits). Comorbid anxiety or depression is common. \
\
When chronic pain is prominent, evidenced-based treatments include CBT and acceptance \
and commitment therapy (ACT). \
\
>ILLNESS ANXIETY DISORDER Illness anxiety disorder involves a preoccupation \
with having or developing a serious illness. Somatie symptoms are mild or not present, and \
there is significant anxiety about health. The person either performs excessive health- \
\
\
\
                            Section 9 - DSM 3 : Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders \
\
related behaviors (e.g., checking for signs of illness) or demonstrates maladaptive \
avoidance (e.g., avoid receiving medical care). The illness preoccupation lasts at least 6 \
months. This prevalence of this disorder is similar in females and males. \
\
>CONVERSION DISORDER (FUNCTIONAL NEUROLOGICAL SYMPTOM \
DISORDER) Conversion disorder involves one or more symptoms or deficits affecting \
voluntary motor or sensory function. The symptoms, which are not intentionally produced, \
are incompatible with recognized neurological or medical conditions. \
\
Specifiers include: with weakness or paralysis, with abnormal movement (e.g., gait \
disorder, tremor), with swallowing symptoms, with speech symptoms, with attacks of \
seizures, with anesthesia or sensory loss, with special sensory symptom (e.g., olfactory \
disturbance), or with mixed symptoms. \
\
Additionally, the clinician must specify if: acute episode (symptoms present less than 6 \
months) or persistent (symptoms present for more than 6 months), and with psychological \
stressor (the stressor needs to be specified) or without psychological stressor. Conversion \
disorder occurs two to three times more frequently in women than men. \
\
>PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS \
The essential feature of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is that a \
medical symptom or condition is present, and psychological or behavioral factors adversely \
affect the medical condition in one or more of the following ways: the factors have \
influenced the course or pathophysiology of the medical condition (e.g., contributing to an \
exacerbation or delayed recovery from the condition), the factors interfere with treatment \
(e.g., poor adherence), or the factors create an additional health risk to the person. Severity \
is specified as: mild, moderate, severe, or extreme. \
\
>FACTITIOUS DISORDER   Factitious disorder is diagnosed as either factitious \
disorder imposed on self or factitious disorder imposed on another (factitious disorder by \
proxy). Factitious disorder is characterized by intentional feigning of physical or \
psychological symptoms, or by creation of injury or disease. The individual presents self \
(or other) as ill, impaired, or injured, and there is an absence of external incentives for the \
behavior. Factitious disorder is either specified as: single episode or recurrent episodes. \
\
Munchausen syndrome refers to the most severe and dramatic presentation of factitious \
disorder. The symptoms are predominantly physical, and the syndrome can include \
extensive travel and seeking of multiple invasive procedures and operations, sometimes \
\
\
 \cb1 \
\
\cb5 \
                            Section 9 - DSM 5: Somatte Symptom and Related Disorders \
\
  9.10 SOMATIC SYMPTOM              AND RELATED \
                     DISORDERS \
\
The common feature of the somatic symptom and related disorders is the prominence of \
somatic symptoms associated with significant distress and impairment. Individuals with \
prominent somatic symptoms are more commonly encountered in primary care and other \
medical settings than in psychiatric and mental health settings. Previous diagnostic criteria \
for somatoform disorders overemphasized medically unexplained symptoms; this was \
unhelpful, unreliable, and frequently seen as pejorative. DSM-5 classification highlights \
distressing somatic symptoms plus abnormal thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in response \
to the symptoms. \
\
>SOMATIC SYMPTOM DISORDER   Somatie symptom disorder is characterized by \
one or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of \
daily life. Additionally, the individual evidences excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors \
related to the somatic symptoms as manifest by at least one of the following: persistent \
thoughts about the seriousness of one's symptoms, persistent high levels of anxiety about \
health or symptoms, or excessive time and energy devoted to symptoms or health concerns. \
While the somatic symptom(s) may not be present continuously, the worries are persistent \
(typically more than 6 months). \
\
Specifiers include: with predominant pain (when the somatic symptoms predominantly \
involve pain), and persistent (severe symptoms, marked impairment, and long duration). \
Additionally, current severity is coded as: mild, moderate, or severe. \
\
According to the DSM-5, the prevalence of somatic symptom disorder is likely to be higher \
among females than males. Persistence of symptoms is associated with demographic \
variables (female gender, older age, less education, lower SES), history of abuse, \
concurrent physical or psychiatric disorder, social stress, and reinforcing factors (e.g., \
illness benefits). Comorbid anxiety or depression is common. \
\
When chronic pain is prominent, evidenced-based treatments include CBT and acceptance \
and commitment therapy (ACT). \
\
>ILLNESS ANXIETY DISORDER Illness anxiety disorder involves a preoccupation \
with having or developing a serious illness. Somatie symptoms are mild or not present, and \
there is significant anxiety about health. The person either performs excessive health- \
\
\
\
                            Section 9 - DSM 3 : Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders \
\
related behaviors (e.g., checking for signs of illness) or demonstrates maladaptive \
avoidance (e.g., avoid receiving medical care). The illness preoccupation lasts at least 6 \
months. This prevalence of this disorder is similar in females and males. \
\
>CONVERSION DISORDER (FUNCTIONAL NEUROLOGICAL SYMPTOM \
DISORDER) Conversion disorder involves one or more symptoms or deficits affecting \
voluntary motor or sensory function. The symptoms, which are not intentionally produced, \
are incompatible with recognized neurological or medical conditions. \
\
Specifiers include: with weakness or paralysis, with abnormal movement (e.g., gait \
disorder, tremor), with swallowing symptoms, with speech symptoms, with attacks of \
seizures, with anesthesia or sensory loss, with special sensory symptom (e.g., olfactory \
disturbance), or with mixed symptoms. \
\
Additionally, the clinician must specify if: acute episode (symptoms present less than 6 \
months) or persistent (symptoms present for more than 6 months), and with psychological \
stressor (the stressor needs to be specified) or without psychological stressor. Conversion \
disorder occurs two to three times more frequently in women than men. \
\
>PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS \
The essential feature of psychological factors affecting other medical conditions is that a \
medical symptom or condition is present, and psychological or behavioral factors adversely \
affect the medical condition in one or more of the following ways: the factors have \
influenced the course or pathophysiology of the medical condition (e.g., contributing to an \
exacerbation or delayed recovery from the condition), the factors interfere with treatment \
(e.g., poor adherence), or the factors create an additional health risk to the person. Severity \
is specified as: mild, moderate, severe, or extreme. \
\
>FACTITIOUS DISORDER   Factitious disorder is diagnosed as either factitious \
disorder imposed on self or factitious disorder imposed on another (factitious disorder by \
proxy). Factitious disorder is characterized by intentional feigning of physical or \
psychological symptoms, or by creation of injury or disease. The individual presents self \
(or other) as ill, impaired, or injured, and there is an absence of external incentives for the \
behavior. Factitious disorder is either specified as: single episode or recurrent episodes. \
\
Munchausen syndrome refers to the most severe and dramatic presentation of factitious \
disorder. The symptoms are predominantly physical, and the syndrome can include \
extensive travel and seeking of multiple invasive procedures and operations, sometimes \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 9 - DSM 5: Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders \
\
with serious risk to life. Impersonation and fabrication often accompany Munchausen \
syndrome. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED SOMATIC SYMPTOM AND RELATED \
DISORDER Examples include brief somatic symptom disorder (duration of symptoms \
less than 6 months) and pseudocyesis (a false belief of being pregnant associated with \
objective signs and symptoms of pregnancy). \
\
\
\
                                 Section 9 - DSM-5: Feeding and Eating Disorders \
\
   9.11 FEEDING AND EATING DISORDERS \
\
Feeding and eating disorders are characterized by a persistent disturbance of eating \
behavior, leading to altered consumption or absorption of food that significantly impairs \
physical health and/or psychosocial functioning. \
\
>PICA The essential feature of pica is the persistent eating of nonnutritive, nonfood \
substances for a period of at least 1 month. This can include paint, plaster, insects, leaves, \
or soil. \
\
Pica is most commonly seen in young children and occasionally in pregnant women. \
Among individuals with intellectual disability, the prevalence of pica increases with the \
severity of the disorder. This disorder can potentially be fatal. \
\
>RUMINATION DISORDER Rumination disorder involves the repeated regurgitation \
of food for at least 1 month. The regurgitated food may be re-chewed, re-swallowed, or \
spit out. The eating disturbance is not attributable to a medical disorder (e.g., reflux). \
\
Complications may include weight loss, failure to make weight gains, or malnutrition. Age \
of onset is usually between 3 and 12 months. Neglect, stressful life situations, and parent- \
child problems may be predisposing factors for rumination disorder. \
\
>AVOIDANT/RESTRICTIVE FOOD INTAKE DISORDER    This disorder is \
characterized by a failure to eat adequately with one or more of the following: significant \
weight loss or failure to achieve expected weight gain, significant nutritional deficiency, \
dependence on a feeding tube or oral nutritional supplements, or marked interference with \
psychosocial functioning. This diagnosis is only made when there is no medical condition \
that accounts for the symptoms. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder is associated with \
the "failure-to-thrive" syndrome. \
\
>ANOREXIA NERVOSA Anorexia nervosa is characterized by a restriction of food \
intake, leading to a significantly low body weight. There is intense fear of gaining weight \
or behavior that interferes with weight gain. Additionally, there must be distortions in self- \
image, undue influence given to body weight or shape in self-evaluation, or a denial of the \
seriousness of the problem. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 9 - DSM-5: Feeding and Eating Disorders \
\
Two subtypes are specified: restricting type and binge-eating/purging type. Additional \
specifiers include: in partial remission or in full remission. Current severity is also \
specified as: mild (BMI of 17+), moderate (BMI 16 - 16.99), severe (BMI 15 - 15.99), or \
extreme (BMI < 15). \
\
Anorexia nervosa typically begins during adolescence or young adulthood. Earlier age of \
onset is associated with shorter duration of illness. Anorexia nervosa is far more common \
in females than males, with a female-to-male ratio of 10:1. Anorexia nervosa is associated \
with cultures, settings, occupations, and avocations that encourage thinness (e.g., \
modeling, elite athletics). Suicide risk is increased in individuals with anorexia nervosa. \
Bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders commonly co-occur with anorexia nervosa; \
alcohol use disorder and other substance use disorders may also be comorbid. \
\
Treatment for anorexia nervosa generally requires a multi-disciplinary approach, including \
physicians, nutritionists, and mental health professionals. Overall, family treatment is the \
most well-established treatment strategy. Although structural family therapy is possibly the \
most well-known approach, a variety of family therapies have been shown to be effective. \
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for anorexia nervosa also has modest research support. \
\
>BULIMIA NERVOSA Bulimia nervosa is characterized by recurrent episodes of binge \
eating followed by inappropriate compensatory behavior to prevent weight gain (e.g., \
laxatives, vomiting, enemas, fasting, or excessive exercise). These episodes occur at least \
once a week for 3 months. Binge eating is described as eating within a discrete time period \
(e.g., 2 hours) an amount definitely larger than most would, or a sense of lack of control \
over eating during the episode. \
\
As appropriate, the specifiers of in partial remission or in full should be used. Current \
severity is also specified based on the average number of episodes of inappropriate \
compensatory behaviors each week: mild (1 - 3), moderate (4 - 7), severe (8 - 13), or \
extreme (14+). \
\
Bulimia nervosa commonly begins in adolescence or young adulthood. Bulimia nervosa is \
far more common in females than males, with a female-to-male ratio of 10:1. Bulimia \
nervosa is associated with childhood obesity and early pubertal maturation, low self- \
esteem, and childhood sexual or physical abuse. Suicide risk is increased in individuals \
with bulimia nervosa. Bipolar, depressive, anxiety, and personality disorders (especially \
borderline personality disorder) commonly co-occur with bulimia nervosa; alcohol use \
disorder and stimulant use disorder may also be comorbid. \
\
\
\
                                 Section 9 - DSM-5: Feeding and Eating Disorders \
\
Successful psychological treatments for bulimia nervosa include cognitive behavioral \
therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy. Antidepressant medications are also highly \
effective, both the tricyclics and the more commonly prescribed SSRIs. Serotonin is \
believed to be the primary neurotransmitter involved with eating disorders. \
\
>BINGE-EATING DISORDER The hallmark of binge-eating disorder is recurrent \
episodes of binge eating associated with three or more of the following: eating much more \
rapidly than normal, eating until feeling uncomfortably full, eating large amounts of food \
when not hungry, eating alone out of embarrassment by the amount of what one is eating, \
or feeling disgusted or guilty afterward. The binge occurs, on average, at least once a week \
for 3 months. \
\
As appropriate, the specifiers of in partial remission or in full should be used. Current \
severity is also specified based on the frequency of binge eating episodes each week: mild \
(1-3), moderate (4 - 7), severe (8 - 13), or extreme (14+). \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED FEEDING OR EATING DISORDER \
Examples include atypical anorexia (e.g., all criteria for anorexia are met, but in spite of \
significant weight loss the person's weight is within or above normal range), bulimia \
nervosa of low frequency and/or limited duration (binge eating and compensatory \
behaviors occur less than once a week and/or for less than 3 months), purging disorder \
(recurrent purging in the absence of binge eating), and night eating syndrome (recurrent \
episodes of night eating either after awakening from sleep or after the evening meal). \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 9 - DSM-5: Elimination Disorders \
\
         9.12 ELIMINATION DISORDERS \
\
 Elimination disorders involve inappropriate eliminations of urine or feces. They are usually \
 first diagnosed in childhood. \
\
 >ENURESIS Enuresis is diagnosed when there is repeated voiding of urine into the bed \
 or clothes, whether intentionally or involuntarily. Enuresis is considered clinically \
 significant either when it occurs twice a week for at least 3 months, or when it results in \
 significant distress or impairment in functioning. The minimum chronological and mental \
 age is 5 years. Enuresis is not diagnosed when it is due to a medical disorder. Enuresis is \
 subtyped with the specifiers of: nocturnal only, diurnal only, or nocturnal and diurnal. \
\
 Enuresis is characterized as either primary (in which the child is age 5 and has never \
 established continence) or secondary (in which the disturbance develops after a period of \
 continence). For 99% of all persons with enuresis, the disorder remits by adulthood. \
\
 The most effective treatment for enuresis is the urine alarm (also known as the bell and pad \
 technique), which is based on principles of classical conditioning. It is more effective in \
 the long run than medications such as Tofranil (imipramine) and DDAVP (a nasal spray) \
 because these medications have a high rate of relapse once they are stopped. Family and/or \
 individual therapy is often used to treat secondary enuresis associated with a stressor. \
\
>ENCOPRESIS Encopresis is diagnosed when there is repeated passage of feces into \
 inappropriate places, whether intentionally or involuntarily. Such incidents must occur at \
 least once a month for a minimum of 3 months. The child must have achieved the \
 chronological and mental age of 4 years. Specifiers include: with constipation and overflow \
 incontinence and without constipation and overflow incontinence. \
\
 Encopresis is characterized as either primary (in which the person has never established \
 continence) or secondary (in which the problem develops after a period of continence). \
\
 At this time, there are no evidence-based treatments for encopresis. Medical management \
 is often used successfully when constipation is the underlying problem. When encopresis \
 is clearly deliberate, features of oppositional-defiant and/or conduct disorder may also be \
 present. Treatment typically involves a behavioral approach in order to promote \
\
 \
\
                                      Section 9 - DSM-5: Elimination Disorders \
\
 appropriate continence. Family therapy may also be indicated, especially if the symptoms \
 are secondary to family conflict. \
\
 >OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED ELIMINATION DISORDER An example is \
 low-frequency enuresis. \
\
 \
 \
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Sleep-Wake Disorders \
\
         9.13 SLEEP-WAKE DISORDERS \
\
Individuals with sleep-wake disorders typically complain of dissatisfaction with the \
quality, timing, and amount of sleep, resulting in daytime distress and impairment. Sleep- \
wake disorders include difficulties getting enough sleep, problems with excessive \
sleepiness in spite of sleeping adequate hours, sleep intrusion (e.g., narcolepsy), breathing- \
related sleep disorders, and parasomnias (e.g., abnormal behavior or physiological events \
occurring in association with sleep). \
\
>INSOMNIA DISORDER The hallmark of this disorder is a predominant complaint of \
dissatisfaction with sleep quality or quantity, associated with one or more of the following: \
difficulty initiating sleep, difficulty maintaining sleep (e.g., frequent awakening), or early- \
morning awakening with inability to go back to sleep. The difficulty occurs at least 3 nights \
each week for at least 3 months. \
\
Specifiers include: with non-sleep disorder mental comorbidity (e.g., depression, substance \
use disorder), with other medical comorbidity (e.g., COPD), and with other sleep disorder. \
\
Additional specifiers include: episodic (symptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 \
months), persistent (symptoms last 3 months or longer), and recurrent (two or more \
episodes within 1 year). \
\
While CBT is regarded as one of the most effective treatments for insomnia, some of CBT's \
component techniques are also used independently to successfully treat insomnia. \
including sleep restriction therapy, stimulus control therapy, and relaxation training. \
\
>HYPERSOMNOLENCE DISORDER Hypersomnolence disorder is characterized by \
excessive sleepiness in spite of sleeping at least 7 hours, with at least one of the following: \
recurrent daytime sleep episodes, prolonged sleep for more than 9 hours that is \
nonrestorative, or difficulty being fully awake after abrupt awakening. The \
hypersomnolence occurs at least 3 times a week for at least 3 months. \
\
Specifiers include: with mental comorbidity, with medical condition, and with another \
sleep disorder. Additional specifiers include: acute, subacute, and persistent. Severity is \
also specified based on the frequency of difficulty maintaining daytime alertness: mild, \
moderate, and severe. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 9-DSM-5; Sleep-Wake Disorders \
\
>NARCOLEPSY The hallmark of narcolepsy is recurrent periods of an irresistible need \
to sleep, lapsing into sleep, or napping occurring within a given day, at least three times \
per week, for at least a 3-month duration. The disorder also involves at least one of the \
following: cataplexy (either brief episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone, typically \
precipitated by laughter or joking, or grimaces or jaw-opening with tongue thrusting, \
without obvious emotional triggers), hypocretin deficiency, or REM indicators (e.g., REM \
sleep latency less than or equal to 15 minutes). Severity is specified as: mild, moderate, or \
severe. \
\
Individuals with narcolepsy commonly experience recurrent intrusions of REM sleep into \
the transition between sleep and wakefulness. These intrusions manifest as hypnagogic \
hallucinations at the onset of sleep, as hypnopompic hallucinations on awakening, or as \
sleep paralysis at the beginning or end of sleep episodes. \
\
>BREATHING-RELATED SLEEP DISORDERS    The breathing-related sleep \
disorders include three distinct disorders: obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (characterized \
by snoring, snorting/gasping, or breathing pauses during sleep), central sleep apnea (no \
evidence of obstruction), and sleep-related hypoventilation (decreased respiration \
associated with elevated CO2 levels). Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is the most \
common. Apnea refers to a temporary cessation of breathing, while hypopnea is \
abnormally slow or shallow breathing. \
\
>CIRCADIAN RHYTHM SLEEP-WAKE DISORDER This disorder is characterized \
by a recurrent pattern of sleep disruption caused by an alteration of the circadian system, \
or by a mismatch in the sleep-wake schedule required by the person's environment (e.g., \
work or social obligations) and the person's own circadian sleep-wake cycle. This \
mismatch results in insomnia or excessive sleepiness. \
\
Specifiers for this disorder include: delayed sleep phase type, advanced sleep phase type, \
irregular sleep-wake type, non-24-hour sleep-wake type, shift work type, and unspecified \
type. Additional specifiers include: episodic, persistent, or recurrent. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Sleep-Wake Disorders \
\
Parasomnias \
\
>NON-RAPID EYE MOVEMENT (NREM) SLEEP AROUSAL DISORDERS \
NREM sleep arousal disorders can be specified as either sleep walking type or sleep terror \
type These disorders involve recurrent episodes of incomplete awakening from sleep, \
usually occurring during the first third of the night, accompanied by either sleepwalking or \
sleep terrors. There is total amnesia for the event and no dream recollection. \
\
Sleepwalking type involves repeated episodes of rising from bed and walking about. While \
sleepwalking, the person has a blank, staring face, is unresponsive, and can be awakened \
only with great difficulty. \
\
Sleep terror type involves recurrent episodes of abrupt awakening that begin with a panicky \
scream. Episodes last from one to ten minutes, during which time the person evidences \
intense fear and autonomic arousal, and is generally unresponsive to efforts to be \
comforted. \
\
>NIGHTMARE DISORDER   Nightmare disorder involves repeated occurrences of \
detailed, frightening dreams about threats to survival. The dreams generally occur during \
the second half of the night (commonly during REM sleep). On awakening, the person \
rapidly becomes alert and oriented. \
\
Specifiers include: with associated non-sleep disorder, with associated other medical \
condition, and with associated other sleep disorder. Additional specifiers include: acute, \
subacute, or persistent. Severity is also specified based on the frequency with which the \
nightmare occurs: mild, moderate, or severe. \
\
>RAPID EYE MOVEMENT (REM) SLEEP BEHAVIOR DISORDER This disorder \
is characterized by repeated episodes of arousal during sleep associated with vocalization \
and/or complex motor behaviors that occur during REM sleep. The behaviors may involve \
injury to self or one's bed partner. \
\
>RESTLESS LEG SYNDROME Restless leg syndrome is a sensorimotor, neurological \
sleep disorder that involves an urge to move the legs, typically in response to unpleasant \
sensations in the legs. The urge to move the legs begins or worsens during periods of \
rest/inactivity, is relieved by movement, and is worse in the evening/night or only occurs \
at these times. Symptoms must be present at least three times a week and have persisted \
for at least 3 months. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 9- DSM-5: Sleep-Wake Disorders \
\
>SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED SLEEP DISORDER Substances that can \
induce a sleep disorder include alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, opioids, sedatives, hypnotics or \
anxiolytics, and stimulants (including cocaine) and tobacco. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED INSOMNIA DISORDER, HYPER- \
SOMNOLENCE DISORDER, OR SLEEP-WAKE DISORDER \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 9-DSM-5: Sexual Dysfunctions \
\
          9.14 SEXUAL DYSFUNCTIONS \
\
Sexual dysfunctions are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by a disturbance \
in sexual response or sexual experience of pleasure. \
\
Specifiers include: lifelong (the disturbance has been present since the individual became \
sexually active) or acquired (the disturbance began after a period of normal sexual \
functioning); and generalized (occurs with all types of stimulation, situations, or partners) \
or situational (occurs only with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners). \
Current severity is also coded based on distress over the symptoms: mild, moderate, or \
severe. \
\
>DELAYED EJACULATION Delayed ejaculation involves either marked delay in \
ejaculation or marked infrequency or absence of ejaculation, occurring on almost all or all \
occasions (75% - 100% of the time). The symptoms have persisted for a minimum of 6 \
months. \
\
>ERECTILE DISORDER Erectile disorder involves either the inability to achieve an \
erection, difficulty maintaining an erection, or decrease in erectile rigidity, occurring on \
almost all or all occasions (75% - 100% of the time). The symptoms have persisted for a \
minimum of 6 months. \
\
>FEMALE ORGASMIC DISORDER Female orgasmic disorder involves either marked \
delay, infrequency, or absence of orgasm, or reduced intensity of sensations of orgasm. \
occurring on almost all or all occasions (75% - 100% of the time). The symptoms have \
persisted for a minimum of 6 months. \
\
>FEMALE   SEXUAL INTEREST/AROUSAL   DISORDER   Female sexual \
interest/arousal disorder involves lack of or reduced sexual interest/arousal as evidenced \
by at least three of the following: absent/reduced sexual interest, absent/reduced sexual \
thoughts or fantasies, lack of or reduced initiation of sexual activity and lack of receptivity \
to partner's initiation, absent/reduced sexual pleasure (75% - 100% of the time), \
absent/reduced interest/arousal in response to internal or external sexual cues (e.g., verbal, \
visual), and absent/reduced sensations during sexual activity (75% - 100% of the time). \
The symptoms have persisted for a minimum of 6 months. \
\
\
\
                                      Section 9 - DSM-5: Sexual Dysfunctions \
\
>GENITO-PELVIC PAIN/PENETRATION DISORDER     This disorder is \
characterized by recurrent difficulties with one or more of the following: penetration during \
intercourse; pain during intercourse or penetration attempts; fear or anxiety about pain \
before, during, or after intercourse; tensing or tightening of the pelvis during attempted \
penetration. The symptoms have persisted for a minimum of 6 months. \
\
>MALE HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER   Male hypoactive sexual \
desire disorder is characterized by a deficiency or absence of sexual thoughts or fantasies \
and desire for sexual activity. The symptoms have persisted for a minimum of 6 months. \
\
>PREMATURE (EARLY) EJACULATION This disorder is characterized by recurrent \
ejaculation during partnered sexual activity within approximately 1 minute following \
penetration and before the person wishes it, occurring on almost all or all occasions (75% \
- 100% of the time). The symptoms have persisted for a minimum of 6 months. \
\
Treatment for premature ejaculation includes the squeeze and stop-start techniques, \
originally developed by Masters and Johnson. Additionally, the female superior position is \
recommended. Effective pharmacologic therapy includes SSRI antidepressants (e.g., \
sertraline, paroxetine, fluoxetine) and topical desensitizing agents (e.g., lidocaine). \
\
>SUBSTANCE/MEDICATION-INDUCED SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION Substances \
that can induce sexual dysfunction include alcohol, opioids, sedatives, hypnotics or \
anxiolytics, and stimulants (including cocaine). \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION An example is \
sexual aversion. \
\
\
 \
\
                                       Section 9 - DSM-5: Gender Dysphoria \
\
            9.15 GENDER DYSPHORIA \
\
This section includes one diagnosis for gender dysphoria, with separate criteria sets for \
children and for adolescents/adults. \
\
>GENDER DYSPHORIA   Gender dysphoria in children is characterized by a marked \
incongruence between one's assigned gender and the gender experienced or expressed, of \
at least 6 months duration, manifest by at least six of the following (the first criterion is \
required): a strong desire to be of the other gender or insistence that one is the other gender; \
a strong preference for cross-dressing; a strong preference for cross-gender roles in play; a \
strong preference for activities, toys, or games that are stereotypically of the other gender; \
a strong preference for playmates of the other gender; a rejection of toys, games, and \
activities that are stereotypically of the same gender; a strong dislike of one's sexual \
anatomy; and a strong desire for sex characteristics of the opposite gender. \
\
Gender dysphoria in adolescents and adults is characterized by a marked incongruence \
between one's assigned gender and the gender experienced or expressed, of at least 6 \
months duration, manifest by at least two of the following: a marked incongruence between \
one's experienced/expressed gender and one's sex characteristics; a strong desire to be rid \
of one's sex characteristics; a strong desire for the sex characteristics of the other gender; \
a strong desire to be of the other gender; a strong desire to be treated as the other gender; a \
strong conviction that one has the feelings and reactions that are typical of the other gender. \
\
The specifier posttransition is coded if the person is living as the other gender and has \
undergone (or is preparing to undergo) at least one cross-sex medical procedure or \
treatment regimen (e.g., surgery or cross-sex hormone treatment). \
\
Gender dysphoria is diagnosed more commonly in natal males (i.e., those assigned to the \
male gender at birth), with the male to female ratio being around 2:1 or 3:1. The onset of \
gender dysphoria among children is commonly between the ages of 2 and 4, and rates of \
persistence of gender dysphoria into adolescence or adulthood range from 2% to 50%. \
Late-onset gender dysphoria occurs around puberty or much later in life; while it occurs \
with natal males, late-onset gender dysphoria is extremely rare in natal females. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED GENDER DYSPHORIA DISORDER \
\
\
\
                       Section 9 - DSM-5: Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders \
\
9.16 DISRUPTIVE, IMPULSE-CONTROL, AND \
              CONDUCT DISORDERS \
\
Disruptive, impulse control, and conduct disorders all involve problems regulating \
emotions and behavior. These disorders involve behaviors that violate the rights of others \
and/or that involve conflict with societal norms or persons in authority. All tend to be more \
common in males than females. \
\
>OPPOSITIONAL DEFIANT DISORDER The essential feature of oppositional defiant \
disorder is a recurrent pattern of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or \
vindictiveness, which persists for at least 6 months. At least four symptoms must be present \
from any of the following categories: angry/irritable mood as evidenced by frequent loss \
of temper, easily annoyed and touchy, frequently angry and resentful; \
argumentative/defiant behavior as evidenced by frequent arguments with authority \
figures/adults, deliberate defiance of rules, deliberate annoyance of others, blaming others \
for one's mistakes; or vindictiveness as evidenced by being spiteful and vindictive at least \
twice within the past 6 months. Severity is specified as: mild (symptoms in only one \
setting), moderate (symptoms present in at least two settings), or severe (symptoms present \
in three or more settings). \
\
Oppositional defiant disorder is more prevalent in families in which there is inconsistency \
in caregiving or in families exhibiting harsh, inconsistent, or neglectful child-rearing. \
Oppositional defiant disorder is slightly more prevalent in males that females (1.4:1 ratio). \
The two most common co-occurring disorders are ADHD and conduct disorder. \
Individuals with oppositional defiant disorder are also at an increased risk for anxiety \
disorders, major depressive disorder, and substance use disorders (adolescents and adults). \
\
>INTERMITTENT EXPLOSIVE DISORDER    This disorder involves recurrent \
outbursts resulting from a failure to control aggressive impulses, as manifest by either of \
the following: verbal aggression (e.g., tirades, verbal arguments) or physical aggression \
toward property, animals, or people, occurring twice weekly for a period of 3 months, in \
which the physical aggression does not cause property damage or physical injury; or three \
behavioral outbursts involving damage or physical injury within a 12-month period. \
Chronological age is at least 6 years. \
\
>CONDUCT DISORDER The essential feature of conduct disorder is a persistent pattern \
of behavior in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or \
\
\
 \
\
                       Section 9 - DSM-5: Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders \
\
rules are violated. At least three criteria must be present in the past 12 months, and at least \
one criterion in the past 6 months from any of the four categories: aggression to people \
and animals as evidenced by bullying and threatening others, initiating physical fights, use \
of a weapon, physical cruelty to people, physical cruelty to animals, stealing while \
confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, armed robbery), forcing someone into sexual activity; \
destruction of property as evidenced by deliberate fire setting, deliberate destruction of \
property; deceitfulness or theft as evidenced by breaking into someone's house or car, lying \
to obtain favors, stealing without confronting a victim (e.g., shoplifting, forgery); or serious \
violation of rules as evidenced by staying out late, running away from home, or being truant \
from school. If the person is 18 or older, criteria are not met for antisocial personality \
disorder. \
\
Specifiers for conduct disorder include: childhood-onset type (prior to age 10), adolescent- \
onset type (after age 10), or unspecified type. Severity is specified as: mild, moderate, or \
severe. Additionally, the specifier with limited prosocial emotions is coded when two or \
more characteristics are persistent over 12 months: lack of guilt or remorse, callous (lack \
of empathy), unconcerned about performance, or shallow or deficient affect. \
\
Associated features of conduct disorder include the tendency to misperceive others" \
intentions as hostile or threatening and thereby feeling justified in responding aggressively. \
Poor frustration tolerance, irritability, temper outbursts, and recklessness are frequently \
seen. Conduct disorder is often associated with precocious sexual behavior, drinking, \
smoking, use of illegal substances, and risk-taking. Suicide attempts and completions occur \
at higher than average rates. ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder are both common in \
individuals with conduct disorder. Other concomitant diagnoses may include specific \
learning disorder, anxiety disorders, depressive or bipolar disorders, and substance-related \
disorders. \
\
Poor prognosis is associated with early onset. The symptoms of conduct disorder remit by \
adulthood in the majority of people with this diagnosis, although a substantial number of \
people with conduct disorder continue to exhibit symptoms that meet the criteria for \
antisocial personality disorder in adulthood. \
\
Predisposing factors to the development of conduct disorder include: difficult infant \
temperament, parental rejection and neglect, inconsistent child-rearing with harsh \
discipline, physical or sexual abuse, lack of supervision, change in caregivers or \
institutional living, large family size, and association with a delinquent peer group. \
\
\
\
                       Section 9 - DSM-5: Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders \
\
Parent management training, a form of behavior therapy, has the most well-established \
success in treating conduct disorder. Other types of behavior and cognitive behavior \
therapies have also shown promise, as has multisystemic therapy, a form of family therapy. \
Severe cases of conduct disorder may warrant residential or inpatient treatment. \
\
>ANTISOCIAL PERSONALITY DISORDER This disorder is included in this section \
because it is closely connected to the spectrum of externalizing disorders of conduct. It is \
also included in the personality disorders section (where diagnostic criteria are described). \
\
>PYROMANIA Pyromania involves deliberate and purposeful fire setting on more than \
one occasion. There is tension or affective arousal experienced before the act, fascination \
with or attraction to fire, and pleasure or relief when setting fires or witnessing their \
aftermath. \
\
>KLEPTOMANIA Kleptomania involves failure to resist impulses to steal objects that \
are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value. There is tension immediately \
before committing the theft and pleasure or relief at the time of the theft. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED DISRUPTIVE, IMPULSE CONTROL, AND \
CONDUCT DISORDER \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 9 - DSM-5: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
        9.17 SUBSTANCE-RELATED AND \
             ADDICTIVE DISORDERS \
\
This section includes substance-related disorders as well as gambling disorder. Substance- \
related disorders include 10 classes of drugs: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogens \
(e.g., LSD, other hallucinogens); inhalants; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; \
stimulants (e.g., amphetamine, cocaine); tobacco; and other/unknown substances. All \
drugs taken in excess activate the brain's reward system, which is involved in \
reinforcement of behaviors and production of memories. As a result, normal activities may \
be neglected. Individuals with lower levels of self-control, possibly reflecting impairment \
in the brain's inhibitory mechanisms, may be predisposed to develop substance use \
disorders. In addition to substance-related disorders, this section also includes gambling \
disorder, reflecting research that gambling behaviors activate reward systems similar to \
those activated by drugs of abuse. \
\
Substance-related disorders are divided into two groups: substance use disorders and \
substance-induced disorders. Substance-induced disorders include intoxication, \
withdrawal, and other substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., psychotic \
disorders, bipolar and depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, sleep disorders, sexual \
disorders, etc.). The criteria for substance/medication-induced mental disorders are \
included in the relevant mental disorder section (e.g., psychotic disorders). \
\
Substance Use Disorders \
\
The essential feature of a substance use disorder is a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and \
physiological symptoms that indicate continued use despite adverse substance-related \
consequences. A substance use disorder can occur with all substances except caffeine. \
\
Criteria for the substance use disorders include a problematic pattern of use leading to \
significant impairment or distress, as manifest by at least two of the following within a 12- \
month period: the substance is consumed in larger amounts or over a longer period of time \
than was intended; a persistent desire or unsuccessful attempts to cut down on the \
substance; a lot of time spent in activities trying to get the substance, use the substance, or \
recover from its effects; cravings for the substance; substance use results in failure to meet \
major role obligations at home, school, or work; continued use despite recurrent social or \
interpersonal problem: important recreational, social, or occupational activities are \
curtailed; recurrent use in situations that are physically dangerous; substance use is \
\
\
\
                          Section 9 - DSM-5: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
continued in spite of awareness of physical or psychological problems caused or \
exacerbated by the substance; tolerance (either a need for increased amounts to achieve the \
desired effects or diminished effect with continued use of the same amount); or withdrawal \
(either characteristic withdrawal symptoms of the substance or the substance is taken to \
relieve or avoid withdrawal). These diagnostic criteria represent four groupings: impaired \
control with regard to the substance, social impairment, risky use, and pharmacological \
criteria. \
\
Current severity of any substance use disorder is specified based on the number of \
symptom criteria endorsed: mild (two or three symptoms), moderate (four or five \
symptoms), and severe (six or more symptoms). \
\
Specifiers for the substance use disorders also include: in early remission (none of the \
criteria, except cravings, have been met for at least 3 months but less than 12 months), in \
sustained remission (none of the criteria, except cravings, have been met for 12 months or \
longer), and in a controlled environment (the person is in an environment where access to \
the substance is restricted). \
\
Substance-Induced Disorders \
\
Substance Intoxication - The essential feature of substance intoxication is the development \
of a reversible, substance specific syndrome due to the recent ingestion of a substance. \
Substance intoxication typically involves disturbances in perception, wakefulness, \
attention, thinking, judgment, psychomotor behavior, and interpersonal behavior, \
attributable to the physiological effects of the substance on the central nervous system. \
Substance intoxication can occur with all substances except tobacco. \
\
Substance Withdrawal - The hallmark of substance withdrawal is the development of \
substance-specific behavioral change, with physical and cognitive elements, due to either \
stopping or reducing the use of a substance (typically use has been heavy and prolonged). \
The syndrome causes distress and/or impairment in social, work, or other areas of \
functioning. Substance withdrawal can occur with all substances except hallucinogens and \
inhalants. \
\
Substance/Medication-Induced Mental Disorders - These disorders may be induced by any \
of the 10 classes of substances that produce substance use disorders or by medications used \
in medical treatment. Each substance/medication induced mental disorder is described in \
the relevant section (e.g., depressive disorders, sleep-wake disorder). \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 9 - DSM-5: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
I. ALCOHOL-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
>ALCOHOL USE DISORDER Alcohol use disorder occurs when the individual's use \
of alcohol meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
>ALCOHOL INTOXICATION Alcohol intoxication is characterized by behavioral or \
psychological changes (e.g., aggressive behavior, mood lability, and impaired judgment) \
and one or more of the following: slurred speech, incoordination, unsteady gait, nystagmus, \
impaired memory and concentration, as well as possible stupor or coma. \
\
>ALCOHOL WITHDRAWAL Alcohol withdrawal is characterized by two or more of \
the following: autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating, pulse > 100), hand tremor, \
insomnia, nausea or vomiting, transient hallucinations or illusions, anxiety, psychomotor \
agitation, and seizures. Alcohol withdrawal can potentially be fatal. \
\
>OTHER ALCOHOL-INDUCED DISORDERS Other alcohol-induced disorders may \
include a psychotic disorder, bipolar disorder, depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, sleep- \
wake disorder, sexual dysfunction, neurocognitive disorder, as well as intoxication and \
withdrawal delirium. \
\
II. CAFFEINE-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
>CAFFEINE INTOXICATION Caffeine intoxication is characterized by five or more \
of the following: restlessness, nervousness, insomnia, flushed face, diuresis (excessive \
urination), gastrointestinal disturbance, muscle twitching, rambling speech, agitation. \
periods of inexhaustibility, and tachycardia. While symptoms of caffeine intoxication may \
mimic an anxiety disorder, caffeine intoxication can be differentiated by diuresis. \
\
>CAFFEINE WITHDRAWAL    Caffeine withdrawal involves three or more of the \
following: headache, fatigue/drowsiness, dysphoric mood or irritability, difficulty \
concentrating, and flu-like symptoms (nausea, vomiting, muscle pain). \
\
>OTHER CAFFEINE-INDUCED DISORDERS Other caffeine-induced disorders may \
include an anxiety disorder or a sleep-wake disorder. \
\
III. CANNABIS-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
>CANNABIS USE DISORDER Cannabis (or marijuana) use disorder occurs when the \
individual's use of cannabis meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
\
\
                          Section 9 - DSM-5: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
>CANNABIS INTOXICATION Cannabis intoxication is characterized by behavioral or \
psychological changes (e.g., impaired motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, sensation of \
slowed time, impaired judgment) and two or more of the following: conjunctival injection \
(redness in the white part of the eye), increased appetite, dry mouth, and tachycardia. \
\
>CANNABIS WITHDRAWAL Cannabis withdrawal is characterized by three or more \
of the following: irritability or aggression, nervousness or anxiety, sleep difficulty, \
decreased appetite or weight loss, restlessness, depressed mood, physical symptoms (e.g., \
abdominal pain, tremors, sweating, fever, chills, headache). \
\
>OTHER CANNABIS-INDUCED DISORDERS   Other cannabis-induced disorders \
may include a psychotic disorder, anxiety disorder, sleep-wake disorder, as well as an \
intoxication delirium. \
\
IV. HALLUCINOGEN-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
>PHENCYCLIDINE (PCP) USE DISORDER PCP use disorder occurs when the \
individual's use of phencyclidine meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
>OTHER HALLUCINOGEN USE DISORDER    Other hallucinogen use disorder \
occurs when the individual's use of a hallucinogen other than PCP (e.g., LSD, peyote, \
psilocybin) meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
>PHENCYCLIDINE (PCP) INTOXICATION PCP intoxication is characterized by \
behavior changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultiveness, impulsiveness, impaired judgment), \
and two or more of the following: nystagmus, hypertension or tachycardia, diminished \
response to pain, ataxia, dysarthria, muscle rigidity, seizures or coma, and hyperacusis \
(oversensitivity to sound). \
\
>OTHER HALLUCINOGEN INTOXICATION Other hallucinogen intoxication is \
characterized by behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., anxiety or depression, ideas of \
reference, paranoid ideation, impaired judgment, fear of losing one's mind) and perceptual \
changes (e.g., illusions, depersonalization, hallucinations), and two or more of the \
following: sweating, tachycardia, palpitations, pupillary dilation, tremors, blurred vision, \
and incoordination. \
\
>HALLUCINOGEN PERSISTING   PERCEPTION DISORDER   Hallucinogen \
persisting perception disorder involves reexperiencing perceptual symptoms that were \
experienced while intoxicated (e.g., geometric hallucinations, false perceptions of \
\
\
 \
\
                           Section 9 - DSM-5: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
movement, flashes of color, halos around objects, or trails of images of moving objects). \
This disorder may persist for weeks, months, or years. \
\
>OTHER PHENCYCLIDINE-INDUCED/HALLUCINOGEN-INDUCED \
DISORDERS Other phencyclidine-induced/hallucinogen-induced disorders may include \
a psychotic disorder, bipolar disorder, depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, as well as an \
intoxication delirium. \
\
V. INHALANT-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
>INHALANT USE DISORDER Inhalant use disorder occurs when the individual's use \
of an inhalant meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
>INHALANT INTOXICATION   Inhalant intoxication involves behavioral or \
psychological changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultiveness, impaired judgment, apathy), as \
well as two or more of the following: dizziness, incoordination, nystagmus, slurred speech, \
unsteady gait, depressed reflexes, lethargy, muscle weakness, blurred vision, tremor, \
psychomotor retardation, euphoria, and stupor or coma. \
\
>OTHER INHALANT-INDUCED DISORDERS Other inhalant-induced disorders may \
include a psychotic disorder, depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, neurocognitive \
disorder, as well as an intoxication delirium. \
\
VI. OPIOID-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
>OPIOID USE DISORDER Opioid use disorder occurs when the individual's use of an \
opioid meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
>OPIOID INTOXICATION Opioid intoxication is characterized by behavioral or \
psychological changes (e.g., initial euphoria followed by apathy, dysphoria, psychomotor \
agitation or retardation, impaired judgment), pupillary constriction, and one or more of the \
following: drowsiness or coma, slurred speech, and impairment in attention or memory. \
\
>OPIOID WITHDRAWAL Opioid withdrawal is characterized by three or more of the \
following: dysphoric mood, nausea or vomiting, muscle aches, diarrhea, fever, yawning, \
insomnia, pupillary dilation or sweating, and weepiness or runny nose. \
\
\
\
                           Section 9 - DSM-3: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
>OTHER OPIOID-INDUCED DISORDERS   Other opioid-induced disorders may \
include a depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, sleep-wake disorder, sexual dysfunction, \
as well as intoxication and withdrawal delirium. \
\
VII. SEDATIVE-, HYPNOTIC-, OR ANXIOLYTIC- \
RELATED DISORDERS \
\
Intoxication and withdrawal from sedatives, hypnotics and anxiolytics result in symptoms \
identical to alcohol intoxication and withdrawal. \
\
>SEDATIVE, HYPNOTIC, OR ANXIOLYTIC USE DISORDER Sedative, hypnotic, \
and anxiolytic use disorder occurs when the individual's use of a sedative, hypnotic, or \
anxiolytic meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
>SEDATIVE, HYPNOTIC, OR ANXIOLYTIC INTOXICATION Sedative, hypnotic, \
or anxiolytic intoxication is characterized by behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., \
aggressive behavior, mood lability, and impaired judgment), and one or more of the \
following: slurred speech, incoordination, unsteady gait, nystagmus, impaired memory and \
concentration, as well as possible stupor or coma. \
\
>SEDATIVE, HYPNOTIC, OR ANXIOLYTIC WITHDRAWAL Sedative, hypnotic, \
or anxiolytic withdrawal is characterized by two or more of the following: autonomic \
hyperactivity (e.g., sweating, pulse > 100), hand tremor, insomnia, nausea or vomiting, \
transient hallucinations or illusions, anxiety, psychomotor agitation, and seizures. \
Withdrawal can potentially be fatal. \
\
>OTHER SEDATIVE-, HYPNOTIC-, OR ANXIOLYTIC-INDUCED DISORDERS \
Other sedative-, hypnotic- or anxiolytic-induced disorders may include a psychotic \
disorder, bipolar disorder, depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, sleep-wake disorder, \
sexual dysfunction, neurocognitive disorder, as well as intoxication and withdrawal \
delirium. \
\
VIII. STIMULANT-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
Stimulants include amphetamines, cocaine, or other stimulants. \
\
>STIMULANT USE DISORDER Stimulant use disorder occurs when the individual's \
use of a stimulant meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
\
 \
\
                          Section 9 - DSM-5: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
>STIMULANT INTOXICATION Stimulant intoxication is characterized by behavioral \
or psychological changes (e.g., euphoria or affective blunting, interpersonal sensitivity, \
hypervigilance, anxiety or anger, and impaired judgment) and two or more of the \
following: psychomotor agitation or retardation, tachycardia (rapid heart rate) or \
bradycardia (slowed heart rate), changes in blood pressure, nausea or vomiting, muscular \
weakness or chest pain, pupillary dilation, perspiration or chills, respiratory problems, \
weight loss, seizures or coma. \
\
>STIMULANT WITHDRAWAL Stimulant withdrawal is characterized by dysphoria \
and two or more of the following: fatigue, unpleasant dreams, increased appetite. \
psychomotor agitation or retardation, and insomnia or hypersomnia. \
\
>OTHER STIMULANT-INDUCED DISORDERS Other stimulant-induced disorders \
may include a psychotic disorder, bipolar disorder, depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, \
obsessive-compulsive disorder, sleep-wake disorder, sexual dysfunction, as well as \
intoxication delirium. \
\
IX. TOBACCO-RELATED DISORDERS \
\
>TOBACCO USE DISORDER Tobacco use disorder occurs when the individual's use \
of tobacco meets the criteria for a substance use disorder. \
\
In terms of tobacco dependence, research bears out the common view that it is very difficult \
to quit smoking. Many smokers require multiple attempts at quitting before they are \
ultimately successful. The most significant trigger for relapse is cravings. Counseling and \
medication are both effective for treating tobacco dependence but using them together is \
more effective than using either one alone. Pharmacological treatments include Zyban (the \
antidepressant bupropion) and the nicotine patch. Fortunately, quitting smoking does \
improve health and longevity regardless of how long the person has been smoking. \
\
>TOBACCO WITHDRAWAL Tobacco withdrawal is characterized by four or more of \
the following: depressed mood, insomnia, irritability or anger, anxiety, difficulty \
concentrating, restlessness, and increased appetite. \
\
>OTHER TOBACCO-INDUCED DISORDERS Other tobacco-induced disorders may \
include a sleep-wake disorder. \
\
\
\
                          Section 9 - DSM-5: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders \
\
Non-substance-related disorders \
\
>GAMBLING DISORDER   This disorder is characterized by persistent and recurrent \
gambling behavior that is maladaptive and causes disruptions in the person's life, as \
indicated by four or more of the following: needs to gamble with increasing amounts of \
money to achieve the desired excitement, is restless or irritable when attempting to cut \
down or stop, has made repeated unsuccessful attempts to cut back or stop, is often \
preoccupied with gambling, often gambles when feeling distressed (e.g., anxious, \
depressed), returns another day in hopes of winning after losing money, lies to conceal the \
extent of involvement, has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship or job because of \
gambling, or relies on others for money to relieve the desperate financial situation caused \
by gambling. \
\
\
 \
\
                                   Section 9 - DSM-5: Neurocognitive Disorders \
\
      9.18 NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDERS \
\
Neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) include delirium, as well as major NCDs, mild NCDs, \
and their subtypes (e.g., due to Alzheimer's disease, due to traumatic brain injury). The \
primary clinical deficit in NCDs is in cognitive function, and the disorders are acquired \
rather than developmental. The impaired cognition has not been present since birth nor in \
early life, and represents a decline from a prior level of functioning. \
\
For many of the NCDs the underlying pathology and etiology can be determined. The term \
dementia is subsumed under major neurocognitive disorder. While dementia is still used \
for disorders involving degenerative processes typically in older adults (e.g., Alzheimer's), \
neurocognitive disorder is preferred for conditions affecting younger persons (e.g., \
impairment secondary to brain injury or HIV infection). The major NCD definition is also \
broader in that individuals with a decline in a single domain can receive the diagnosis (e.g., \
what used to be an amnestic disorder is now a major NCD). Less severe levels of cognitive \
impairment are diagnosed as mild neurocognitive impairment. \
\
The criteria for the various NCDs are all based on six defined cognitive domains: complex \
attention (sustained attention, divided attention, processing speed); executive function \
(planning, decision-making, responding to feedback, mental flexibility); learning and \
memory (immediate memory, recent memory, remote memory); expressive and receptive \
language (naming, word finding, grammar, comprehension); perceptual-motor (visual \
perception, visuo-constructional, perceptual-motor, praxis, gnosis); and social cognition \
(recognition of emotions, theory of mind). \
\
The specifiers for both major and minor NCD include whether they are due to: Alzheimer's \
disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Lewy body disease, vascular disease, \
traumatic brain injury, substance/medication use, HIV infection, prion disease (e.g., \
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease), Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, another medical \
condition, multiple etiologies, or unspecified. \
\
>DELIRIUM The hallmark of delirium is a disturbance in attention and awareness (e.g., \
reduced orientation to the environment). The onset is rapid (hours to days) and the course \
tends to be fluctuating. Additionally, delirium includes a cognitive disturbance (e.g., \
memory problems, disorientation, language difficulties, visuospatial abilities, or perceptual \
disturbance). Specifiers include: substance intoxication delirium, substance withdrawal \
\
\
\
                                   Section 9 - DSM-5: Neurocognitive Disorders \
\
delirium, medication-induced delirium, delirium due to another medical condition, and \
delirium due to multiple etiologies. \
\
Common causes of delirium include infections, metabolic disorders (e.g., hypoglycemia, \
renal disease), post-operative states, and substance intoxication or withdrawal. The \
majority of individuals with delirium recover fully, with or without treatment; nevertheless, \
early intervention shortens the duration of the delirium. Untreated, delirium may progress \
to coma, seizures, or death \
\
>MAJOR NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER Major neurocognitive disorder (NCD) is \
diagnosed when there is significant cognitive decline from a prior level of functioning in \
one or more domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, \
language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition). The decline is noted by the individual, a \
knowledgeable person, or the clinician, and documented by standardized testing or \
quantified clinical assessment. The cognitive deficits interfere with independent \
functioning in everyday activities. \
\
>MILD NEUROCOGNITIVE DISORDER   Mild neurocognitive disorder (NCD) is \
diagnosed when there is modest cognitive decline from a prior level of functioning in one \
or more domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language, \
perceptual-motor, or social cognition). The decline is noted by the individual, a \
knowledgeable person, or the clinician, and documented by standardized testing or \
quantified clinical assessment. The cognitive deficits do not interfere with independent \
functioning in everyday activities. \
\
The DSM-5 includes some additional features for neurocognitive disorders due to specific \
etiologies. \
\
Due to Alzheimer's disease - insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment; either \
evidence of a causative Alzheimer's disease genetic mutation or clear evidence of a decline \
in memory, learning, and at least one other cognitive domain; no extended plateaus; no \
evidence of mixed etiology. \
\
Due to frontotemporal disorder - insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment; \
either behavioral variant (e.g., behavioral inhibition, apathy, perseverative behaviors, \
hyperorality) with decline in social cognition and/or executive functioning, or language \
variant (e.g., prominent decline in speech production, word finding, grammar, or \
comprehension); relative sparing of learning, memory and perceptual-motor function. \
\
\
 \
\
                                  Section 9- DSM-5: Neurocognitive Disorders \
\
With Lewy bodies - insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment; several of the \
following: fluctuating cognition with variations in attention/alertness, visual \
hallucinations, parkinsonism, REM sleep behavior disorder, and severe neuroleptic \
sensitivity. \
\
Due to vascular disease - a stepwise pattern of deterioration and a patchy distribution of \
deficits; evidence of cerebrovascular disease; decline is prominent in complex attention \
and frontal-executive functions. \
\
Due to traumatic brain injury - evidence of a traumatic brain injury; one or more of the \
following: loss of consciousness, posttraumatic amnesia, disorientation and confusion. \
neurological signs (e.g., seizures, hemiparesis); persists past the acute post-injury period. \
\
Substance/medication induced - the impairments persist beyond intoxication and \
withdrawal; the substance can produce neurocognitive impairment (e.g., alcohol, \
inhalants); for alcohol, the subtype amnestic-confabulatory is coded when appropriate \
[Korsakoff's syndrome, caused by a chronic thiamin deficiency secondary to alcohol use, \
results in anterograde amnesia and confabulation.] \
\
Due to HIV infection - criteria are met for major or minor NCD and there is documented \
infection with HIV; the NCD is not attributable to another medical condition. \
\
Due to prion disease - insidious onset and rapid progression of impairment; there are motor \
features of prion disease such as myoclonus (jerky muscle contractions) or ataxia, or \
biomarker evidence. [Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), the most common prion disease, \
typically progresses very rapidly to major impairment over several months.] \
\
Due to Parkinson's disease - insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment: \
occurs in the context of a diagnosed Parkinson's disease. \
\
Due to Huntington's disease - insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment; \
occurs in the context of a diagnosed Huntington's disease, or risk for Huntington's disease \
(as cognitive abnormalities can predate motor symptoms by 15 years). \
\
\
\
                                    Section 9- DSM-5: Personality Disorders \
\
        9.19 PERSONALITY DISORDERS \
\
A personality disorder is defined in the DSM-5 as "an enduring pattern of inner experience \
and behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations of an individual's culture, is \
pervasive and inflexible, has an onset in adolescence or early adulthood, is stable over time, \
and leads to distress or impairment" (p. 645). Symptoms are evident in at least two areas: \
cognition (e.g., perceptions of self, others, events), affect (e.g., range, lability, \
appropriateness of emotional response), interpersonal functioning, or impulse control. A \
diagnosis of personality disorder can be made in persons under age 18 if the features of the \
personality disorder have been present for at least 1 year (with the exception of antisocial \
personality disorder, which cannot be diagnosed in persons under age 18). \
\
The DSM-5 delineates ten personality disorders and divides them into three clusters. \
Cluster A disorders involve odd or eccentric presentation, and include paranoid, schizoid, \
and schizotypal personality disorders. Cluster B disorders involve dramatic, emotional, and \
erratic behavior and include antisocial, borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic personality \
disorders. Cluster C disorders involve an anxious or fearful presentation and include \
avoidant, dependent, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders. \
\
Cluster A Personality Disorders: Odd and Eccentric \
\
>PARANOID PERSONALITY DISORDER The hallmark of paranoid personality \
disorder is a pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others and tendency to interpret \
actions of others as deliberately demeaning, threatening, and malevolent, as evidenced by \
four or more of the following: suspects that others are exploiting, harming, or deceiving \
him or her; is preoccupied with doubts about trustworthiness of others; is reluctant to \
confide in others because of concerns that the information will be used against him or her; \
interprets benign comments/events as demeaning or threatening; bears grudges; perceives \
attacks on his or her character, and responds with anger or counterattacks; believes his or \
her partner is unfaithful. \
\
>SCHIZOID PERSONALITY DISORDER    Schizoid personality disorder is \
characterized by a pattern of detachment from and indifference to social relationships and \
a restricted range of emotions, as evidenced by four or more of the following: neither \
desires nor enjoys close relationships (including familial); usually chooses solitary \
activities; has minimal interest in sexual experiences; experiences little pleasure in \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Personality Disorders \
\
activities; lacks close friends; appears indifferent to praise; is cold, detached or affectively \
flat. \
\
>SCHIZOTYPAL PERSONALITY DISORDER The hallmark of schizotypal \
personality disorder is a pattern of deficits in social and interpersonal functioning marked \
by discomfort with and reduced capacity for close relationships, as well as by peculiarities \
in cognition, perception, ideation, appearance and behavior, as evidenced by five or more \
of the following: ideas of reference; odd beliefs (e.g., telepathy, clairvoyance); unusual \
perceptual experiences; odd thinking and speech (e.g., vague, overelaborate); \
suspiciousness/paranoia; inappropriate or constricted affect; odd behavior or appearance; \
lack of close friends; social anxiety associated with paranoid fears. \
\
Cluster B Personality Disorders: Dramatic, Emotional and Erratic \
\
>ANTISOCIAL PERSONALITY DISORDER   Features of this disorder include a \
pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others since at least age 15, \
as indicated by three or more of the following: repeatedly committing unlawful acts; \
deceitfulness (e.g., lying, conning); impulsivity and failure to plan ahead; repeated physical \
fights/assaults; disregard for the safety of self or others; irresponsibility (e.g., failure to \
keep a job or honor financial obligations); lack of remorse. The individual must be at least \
18 years old and there is evidence of conduct disorder before age 15. \
\
>BORDERLINE PERSONALITY DISORDER   The hallmark of this disorder is a \
pattern of instability of mood, interpersonal relationships, and self-image, as well as \
significant impulsivity as indicated by five or more of the following: efforts to avoid \
abandonment; intense, unstable relationships characterized by idealization and \
devaluation; unstable self-image; impulsivity in two areas that are potentially damaging \
(e.g., spending, sex, substance abuse); recurrent suicidal or self-mutilating behavior; \
affective instability; chronic feelings of emptiness; inappropriate anger; transient paranoid \
ideation or dissociative symptoms (stress-related). \
\
>HISTRIONIC PERSONALITY DISORDER   Features of histrionic personality \
disorder include excessive emotionality and attention-seeking, as evidenced by five or \
more of the following: is uncomfortable when not the center of attention; sexually \
seductive/provocative behavior; rapidly shifting and shallow expressions of emotion; uses \
physical appearance to draw attention; speaks dramatically but without substance; \
exaggerates emotion; is easily influenced by others (suggestible); considers relationships \
closer than they actually are. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 9 - DSM-5: Personality Disorders \
\
>NARCISSISTIC PERSONALITY DISORDER This disorder involves a pattern of \
grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy, as indicated by five or more of the \
following: a grandiose sense of self-importance; preoccupation with fantasies of greatness \
(e.g., power, brilliance, beauty): believes that he or she is special; needs excessive \
admiration; has a sense of entitlement; is interpersonally exploitative (e.g., uses others); \
lacks empathy; is envious of others, or thinks others are envious of him or her; is arrogant \
and haughty. \
\
Cluster C Personality Disorders: Anxious and Fearful \
\
>AVOIDANT PERSONALITY DISORDER Characteristics of avoidant personality \
disorder include a pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity \
to negative evaluation, as evidenced by four or more of the following: avoids occupational \
activities due to fear of criticism, disapproval, or rejection; generally unwilling to get \
involved with others unless certain of being liked; restrained in intimate relationship (due \
to fear of shame or ridicule); preoccupied with concerns of rejection and criticism in social \
situations; inhibited in new situations due to a sense of inadequacy; views self as socially \
inept or inferior; reluctant to take risks or try new things because of potential \
embarrassment. \
\
>DEPENDENT PERSONALITY DISORDER This disorder is characterized by a \
pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that results in submissive and clinging \
behaviors, difficulties making decisions, and fears of separation as evidenced by five or \
more of the following: difficulty making decisions without advice and reassurance from \
others; needs other to assume responsibility for most major areas; has difficulty expressing \
disagreement due to fear of loss of approval; difficulty doing things on his or her own; \
excessive attempts to obtain support from others; uncomfortable when alone due to feelings \
of not being self-sufficient; urgently seeks a new relationship when a close relationship \
ends; preoccupied with fears of being left alone. \
\
>OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE PERSONALITY DISORDER The hallmark of this \
disorder is a preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and control, which results in \
inflexibility and inefficiency, as evidenced by four or more of the following: preoccupation \
with details, rules, or schedules such that the major point of the activity is lost; \
perfectionism that interferes with task completion; excessive focus on work and \
productivity to the exclusion of friendship and leisure; overconscientiousness and \
inflexibility about morals and values; inability to discard worn-out and worthless objects; \
reluctance to delegate tasks to others; stingy with money; rigid and stubborn. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 9- DSM-5: Personality Disorders \
\
Other Personality Disorders \
\
>PERSONALITY CHANGE DUE TO ANOTHER MEDICAL CONDITION \
Diagnostic criteria include a persistent personality disturbance that represents a change \
from the person's previous personality with evidence that the disturbance is a direct \
physiological result of a general medical condition. The disorder is coded along with the \
medical condition. Medical conditions may include: CNS neoplasms, head trauma, stroke, \
Huntington's disease, seizures, infectious conditions (e.g., HIV), endocrine disorders (e.g., \
hypothyroidism), and autoimmune conditions (e.g., lupus). \
\
>OTHER   SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED PERSONALITY DISORDER   These \
categories apply to presentations in which symptoms of a personality predominate, but the \
full criteria are not met for any personality disorder. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 9-DSM-3: Paraphilie Disorders \
\
          9.20 PARAPHILIC DISORDERS \
\
Paraphilias are intense and persistent sexual urges, fantasies, or behaviors that involve \
nonhuman objects, the suffering or humiliation of oneself or one's partner, or children or \
other non-consenting persons. A paraphilic disorder is a paraphilia that causes distress or \
impairment to the individual, or whose satisfaction involves personal harm or risk of harm \
to others. \
\
The specifier in a controlled environment is used when individuals are living in an \
institutional setting where opportunities to engage in the paraphilia is limited. The specifier \
in full remission applies to a situation in which the person has not acted on the urges and \
there has not been distress or impairment in functioning for at least 5 years, while in an \
uncontrolled environment. \
\
With the exception of sexual masochism, paraphilie disorders occur almost exclusively in \
men. \
\
>VOYEURISTIC DISORDER Diagnostic criteria for voyeuristic disorder include \
fantasies, urges, or behavior that involve observing an unsuspecting person who is naked. \
disrobing, or engaging in sexual activity, over a period of at least 6 months. The individual \
is at least 18 years of age. \
\
>EXHIBITIONISTIC DISORDER Exhibitionistic disorder involves fantasies, urges, or \
behavior that involve exposing one's genitals to a stranger, over a period of at least 6 \
months. \
\
>FROTTEURISTIC DISORDER Frotteuristic disorder involves fantasies, urges, or \
behavior that involve rubbing or touching a non-consenting person, over a period of at least \
6 months. \
\
>SEXUAL MASOCHISM DISORDER The hallmark of sexual masochism disorder is \
fantasies, urges, or behavior involving the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or made \
to suffer, over a period of at least 6 months. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 9- DSM-5: Paraphilic Disorders \
\
>SEXUAL SADISM DISORDER Characteristics of this disorder are fantasies, urges, or \
behavior involving sexual excitement resulting from the physical or psychological \
suffering of another person, over a period of at least 6 months. \
\
>PEDOPHILIC DISORDER This disorder is characterized by fantasies, urges, or \
behavior involving sexual contact with a prepubescent child (age 13 years or less), over a \
period of at least 6 months. The person must be at least 16 years old and at least 5 years \
older than the child being fantasized about. \
\
>FETISHISTIC DISORDER Fetishistic disorder involves sexual fantasies, urges, or \
behavior involving either the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on a \
nongenital body part, over a period of at least 6 months. \
\
>TRANSVESTIC DISORDER Transvestic disorder is characterized by sexual fantasies. \
urges, or behavior that involves cross-dressing, over a period of at least 6 months. \
\
>OTHER   SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED PARAPHILIC DISORDER Examples \
include necrophilia (corpse), zoophilia (animals) and telephone scatologia (obscene phone \
calls). \
\
\
\
                                    Section 9 - DSM-5: Other Mental Disorders \
\
       9.21 OTHER MENTAL DISORDERS \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED MENTAL DISORDER DUE TO ANOTHER \
MEDICAL CONDITION These categories apply to presentations in which symptoms \
characteristic of a mental disorder due to a medical condition predominate, but the full \
criteria are not met for any specific mental disorder due to a medical condition. An example \
would be dissociative symptoms due to complex partial seizures. \
\
>OTHER SPECIFIED/UNSPECIFIED MENTAL DISORDER These categories \
apply to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a mental disorder predominate, \
but the full criteria are not met for any mental disorder. \
\
\
 \
\
        Section 9-DSM-5: Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse Effects of Medication \
\
  9.22 MEDICATION-INDUCED MOVEMENT \
      DISORDERS AND OTHER ADVERSE \
            EFFECTS OF MEDICATION \
\
The conditions in this section are not considered mental disorders. \
\
>NEUROLEPTIC-INDUCED     PARKINSONISM/OTHER     MEDICATION- \
INDUCED PARKINSONISM   This condition is characterized by tremor, muscular \
rigidity, akinesia (difficulty initiating movement), or bradykinesia (slowed movements). \
\
>NEUROLEPTIC MALIGNANT SYNDROME      Neuroleptic malignant syndrome \
involves severe muscle rigidity, elevated temperature, and other symptoms, such as labile \
blood pressure and changes in consciousness. \
\
>MEDICATION-INDUCED ACUTE DYSTONIA This condition is characterized by \
abnormal and prolonged contraction (spasms) of the muscle of the eyes (oculogyric crisis). \
head, neck, limbs, or trunk. \
\
>MEDICATION-INDUCED   ACUTE AKATHISIA     This condition involves \
complaints of restlessness accompanied by excessive movements (e.g., fidgeting, rocking, \
pacing, inability to sit still). \
\
>TARDIVE DYSKINESIA    Tardive dyskinesia involves athetoid (writhing) or \
choreiform (jerky) movements of the tongue, jaw, and extremities. \
\
>TARDIVE DYSTONIA/AKATHISIA These symptoms are part of a tardive syndrome \
and involve additional movement problems such as dystonia or akathisia. \
\
>MEDICATION-INDUCED POSTURAL TREMOR This condition involves a fine \
tremor occurring while trying to maintain posture. \
\
>OTHER MEDICATION-INDUCED MOVEMENT DISORDER       This condition \
involves a medication-induced movement disorder not captured by any other specific \
disorder. \
\
\
\
        Section 9-DSM-5: Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse Effects of Medication \
\
>ANTIDEPRESSANT DISCONTINUATION SYNDROME This diagnosis involves \
a set of symptoms that can occur after abrupt cessation of antidepressants, and may include \
sensory and somatic symptoms (e.g., flashes of light, nausea), as well as nonspecific \
anxiety and feelings of dread. \
\
>OTHER ADVERSE EFFECT OF MEDICATION This diagnosis is assigned in the \
presence of adverse side effects of medication, other than movement symptoms (e.g .. \
hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias). \
\
\
 \
\
                   Section 9 - DSM-5: Other Conditions That May Be A Focus of Clinical Attention \
\
  9.23 OTHER CONDITIONS THAT MAY BE A \
        FOCUS OF CLINICAL ATTENTION \
\
 I. RELATIONAL PROBLEMS \
\
>PROBLEMS RELATED TO FAMILY UPBRINGING Diagnoses in this category \
 include: parent-child relational problem, sibling relational problem, upbringing away from \
 parents, and child affected by parental relationship distress. \
\
>OTHER PROBLEMS RELATED TO PRIMARY SUPPORT GROUP Diagnoses in \
 this category include: relationship distress with spouse or intimate partner, disruption of \
 family by separation or divorce, high expressed emotion level within family, and \
 uncomplicated bereavement. \
\
 II. ABUSE AND NEGLECT \
\
 A. Child Maltreatment and Neglect Problems \
\
>CHILD PHYSICAL ABUSE Diagnoses in this category include: child physical abuse, \
 confirmed; child physical abuse, suspected; and other circumstances related to child \
 physical abuse. \
\
 >CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE Diagnoses in this category include: child sexual abuse, \
 confirmed; child sexual abuse, suspected; and other circumstances related to child sexual \
 abuse. \
\
 >CHILD NEGLECT Diagnoses in this category include: child neglect, confirmed; child \
 neglect, suspected; and other circumstances related to child neglect. \
\
 >CHILD PSYCHOLOGICAL ABUSE Diagnoses in this category include: child \
 psychological abuse, confirmed; child psychological abuse, suspected; and other \
 circumstances related to child psychological abuse. \
\
 \
\
                   Section 9 - DSM-5: Other Conditions That May Be A Focus of Clinical Attention \
\
 B. Adult Maltreatment and Neglect Problems \
\
 >SPOUSE OR PARTNER VIOLENCE, PHYSICAL Diagnoses in this category \
 include: spouse or partner violence, physical, confirmed; spouse or partner violence. \
 physical, suspected; and other circumstances related to spouse or partner violence, \
 physical. \
\
 >SPOUSE OR PARTNER VIOLENCE, SEXUAL Diagnoses in this category include: \
 spouse or partner violence, sexual, confirmed; spouse or partner violence, sexual, \
 suspected; and other circumstances related to spouse or partner violence, sexual. \
\
 >SPOUSE OR PARTNER NEGLECT Diagnoses in this category include: spouse or \
 partner neglect, confirmed; spouse or partner neglect, suspected; and other circumstances \
 related to spouse or partner neglect. \
\
 >SPOUSE OR PARTNER ABUSE, PSYCHOLOGICAL Diagnoses in this category \
 include: spouse or partner abuse, psychological, confirmed; spouse or partner abuse, \
 psychological, suspected; and other circumstances related to spouse or partner abuse, \
 psychological. \
\
 >ADULT ABUSE BY NONSPOUSE OR NONPARTNER Diagnoses in this category \
 include: adult physical abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, confirmed; adult physical abuse \
 by nonspouse or nonpartner, suspected; adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, \
 confirmed; adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, suspected; adult psychological \
 abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, confirmed; adult psychological abuse by nonspouse or \
 nonpartner, suspected; and other circumstances related to adult abuse by nonspouse or \
 nonpartner. \
\
 III. EDUCATIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL PROBLEMS \
\
 >EDUCATIONAL PROBLEMS Diagnoses in this category include: academic or \
 educational problem. \
\
>OCCUPATIONAL PROBLEMS Diagnoses in this category include: problem related \
 to current military deployment status and other problem related to employment. \
\
 \
 \
\
                   Section 9 - DSM-5: Other Conditions That May Be A Focus of Clinical Attention \
\
 IV. HOUSING AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS \
\
 >HOUSING PROBLEMS Diagnoses in this category include: homelessness, inadequate \
 housing, discord with neighbor or landlord, and problem related to living in a residential \
 institution. \
\
>ECONOMIC PROBLEMS Diagnoses in this category include: lack of adequate food \
 or safe drinking water, extreme poverty, low income, insufficient social insurance or \
 welfare support, and unspecified housing or economic problem. \
\
 V. OTHER PROBLEMS RELATED TO THE SOCIAL \
 ENVIRONMENT \
\
 Diagnoses in this category include: phase of life problem, problem related to living alone, \
 acculturation difficulty, social exclusion or rejection, target of (perceived) adverse \
discrimination or persecution, and unspecified problem related to social environment. \
\
 VI. PROBLEMS RELATED TO CRIME OR INTERACTION \
 WITH THE LEGAL SYSTEM \
\
 Diagnoses in this category include: victim of crime, conviction in civil or criminal \
 proceedings without imprisonment, imprisonment or other incarceration, problems related \
 to release from prison, and problems related to other legal circumstances. \
\
 VII. OTHER HEALTH SERVICE ENCOUNTERS FOR \
 COUNSELING AND MEDICAL ADVICE \
\
 Diagnoses in this category include: sex counseling and other counseling or consultation. \
\
 VIII. PROBLEMS RELATED TO OTHER \
 PSYCHOSOCIAL, PERSONAL, AND ENVIRONMENTAL \
 CIRCUMSTANCES \
\
 Diagnoses in this category include: religious or spiritual problem; problems related to \
 unwanted pregnancy, problems related to multiparity (giving births to twins, triplets, etc.), \
 discord with social services provider (including probation officer, case manager, or social \
 services worker), victim of terrorism or torture, exposure to disaster or war, other problem \
\
 \
\
                   Section 9-DSM-5: Other Conditions That May Be A Focus of Clinical Attention \
\
 related to psychosocial circumstances, and unspecified problem related to unspecified \
 psychosocial circumstances. \
\
 IX. OTHER CIRCUMSTANCES OF PERSONAL HISTORY \
\
 Diagnoses in this category include: other personal history of psychological trauma, \
 personal history of self-harm, personal history of military deployment, other personal risk \
 factors, problem related to lifestyle, adult antisocial behavior, and child or adolescent \
 antisocial behavior. \
\
 X. PROBLEMS RELATED TO ACCESS TO MEDICAL \
 AND OTHER HEALTH CARE \
\
 Diagnoses in this category include: unavailability or inaccessibility of health care facilities, \
 and unavailability or inaccessibility of other helping agencies. \
\
 XI. NONADHERENCE TO MEDICAL TREATMENT \
\
 Diagnoses in this category include: nonadherence to medical treatment, overweight or \
obesity, malingering, wandering associated with a mental disorder, and borderline \
 intellectual functioning. \
\
 \
 \
\
                   \
\
                   MEMORY \
\
                      SECTION 10 \
\
                     PsychPrep \
                     PASS EFFICIENTLY \
\
            SECTION 10: MEMORY \
\
This section describes the stages of memory, a classification system for memory, the \
biology of memory, forgetting, and strategies for enhancing memory. \
\
            10.1 STAGES OF MEMORY \
\
Researchers have identified at least three distinct stages of memory: sensory memory, \
short-term memory, and long-term memory. \
\
I. SENSORY MEMORY \
\
Sensory memory involves transforming sensory input into the type of data that can be \
understood and storing the information as a visual or auditory image. The information in \
sensory memory is temporary, with visual images (iconic memory) lasting about a 1/2 \
second, and sounds (echoic memory) lasting up to four seconds. \
\
While we are frequently bombarded with much simultaneous visual and auditory \
information (e.g., at a party), only information that is attended to, by a process of selective \
attention, can pass into short-term memory (STM). Selective attention can be either \
deliberate or automatic, and in the absence of deliberately focused attention, our nervous \
systems automatically make some choices for us. Overall, stimuli that are more likely to \
be automatically attended to include those that are either novel or relate to satisfying basic \
needs. \
\
II. SHORT-TERM MEMORY (STM) \
\
Short-term memory works to process ongoing information and to store memories for a \
short duration of up to 30 seconds. Short-term memory is divided into two components, \
primary memory and working memory. \
\
>PRIMARY MEMORY Primary memory is a passive "holding tank" for small amounts \
of information requiring no manipulation (e.g., remember five digits in sequence). \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 10- Memory: Stages of Memory \
\
>WORKING MEMORY    Working memory not only holds information, but also \
manipulates it (e.g., repeating the five digits in reverse order). \
\
Rehearsing is the deliberate repetition, usually acoustic, of information to enhance our \
short-term memory for it, or to enhance its transfer into long-term memory. In fact, \
laboratory studies have shown that when interference tasks that prevent rehearsal are \
introduced, the contents of short-term memory are lost. \
\
The capacity for short-term memory is very limited, generally seven items, plus or minus \
two. Thus, the average person will remember 5 to 9 items from a list of unrelated items \
(e.g., digits, or names). Chunking involves transforming separate items into meaningful \
units and thereby increases the ability to remember the items. For example, whereas a \
random list of numbers 1-7-7-6-1-9-4-5-1-9-9-6 consists of twelve separate meaningful \
units (i.e., bits of information) and would tax most people's memory, the list 1776-1945- \
1996 is only three chunks and could be easily memorized. \
\
We appear to have a dual coding system for processing short-term memory information, \
including both verbal and visual channels. We use the visual system, for example, when \
we look at a flower, and later remember what the flower looked like in the form of a picture. \
We use a verbal system for processing words that are either seen or heard. The word \
"flower" thus enters short-term memory as a word pattern rather than picture. Research has \
shown that people remember words better if they also create a visual image of them. \
\
III. LONG-TERM MEMORY (LTM) \
\
Long-term memory is neither limited in capacity nor duration. Some theorists divide long- \
term memory into recent memory (intermediate memory), which lasts around two weeks, \
and remote memory (long-term memory), which lasts two years or more. For information \
to be useful, it must be stored so that it can be retrieved as well as updated by new \
information. \
\
Some research has supported the idea that during REM sleep, new information brought \
into long-term memory is reviewed, improved, and systematically catalogued. In addition, \
research has suggested that dream deprivation can result in impairment in memory \
formation. Research has also shown that learning from a tape cannot be done while \
sleeping, and that information is encoded and stored better when a person is alert, rather \
than drowsy. The ability to retain an image of what is seen for a long period of time is \
called eidetic (photographic) memory. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 10 - Memory: Stages of Memory \
\
A. KEY CONCEPTS \
\
Some important concepts associated with long-term memory include retrieval, priming, the \
Zeigarnik effect, redintegration, landmark events, flashbulb memories, prospective \
memory, and the effects of hypnosis. \
\
>RETRIEVAL Retrieval is the process of accessing information from long-term memory \
into short-term memory for analysis or awareness. Frequently, a cue will serve as a \
stimulus to begin the retrieval process from long-term memory. In general, tasks requiring \
recognition are easier than those requiring recall. This is because recognition involves \
matching a specific cue to items in long-term memory, while recall involves using a general \
stimulus cue to search the contents of long-term memory. A method for improving \
recognition is called priming. \
\
>PRIMING Priming involves exposure to a stimulus that makes it easier for a person to \
recognize the stimulus at a later point in time. For example, a person who is shown the \
following puzzle, "c_m_r_" and is asked to identify the word would be more likely to come \
up with "camera" if she has seen this puzzle before. \
\
>ZEIGARNIK EFFECT When a person is trying to solve a problem involving recall \
and comes to an impasse, it appears that the brain continues to work unconsciously until a \
solution is obtained. This is referred to as the Zeigarnik effect, the tendency to remember \
and work on incomplete tasks. \
\
>REDINTIGRATION   Redintigration occurs when something (e.g., a smell from \
childhood) rapidly unlocks a chain of memories. \
\
>LANDMARK EVENTS When we have difficulty with retrieval, we may also rely on \
landmark events to facilitate the process. Landmark events refer to events that are \
important to us, such as graduation, marriage, or the birth of our child, that serve as key \
markers for our memory. We can use these events to go backward or forward to locate \
details of other events that occurred around the same time. \
\
>FLASHBULB MEMORIES   Flashbulb memories involve memories of distinct, \
significant events, usually of a traumatic nature. Since flashbulb memories evoke strong \
emotional reactions at the time of encoding, they tend to involve vivid detail and are \
remembered for a long period of time. Typically, the person who experiences the event is \
most likely to remember later on what took place immediately before and during the \
traumatic event. For example, if a man witnesses a shooting spree at a local post office, he \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 10 - Memory: Stages of Memory \
\
is most likely to remember where he parked his car in the post office lot, being in line at \
the post office, and the shooting itself. \
\
>PROSPECTIVE MEMORY Prospective memory involves remembering that one had \
planned to do something at a particular time. Problems with prospective memory may \
involve failure to remember the purpose of a cue like a timer (e.g., not remembering why \
one had set a timer) or failure to remember what one had planned to do at a particular time \
(e.g., take a walk at four o'clock in the afternoon). \
\
>EFFECTS OF HYPNOSIS When a person is under hypnosis, he or she can usually \
provide more details about a memory. Research has indicated, however, that hypnosis tends \
to elicit more false memories than true ones. A hypnotized person is more likely to \
reconstruct memories, or use imagination to fill in gaps. Nevertheless, the person tends to \
have a great deal of confidence in the accuracy of the memory. In addition, leading \
questions by the therapist tend to alter memories. When given false information, the \
hypnotized person is likely to incorporate it into his or her memory. \
\
B. ACCURACY OF LONG-TERM MEMORY \
\
Our long-term memories can include additions, omissions and revisions of original events. \
While information in sensory memory and short-term memory is usually accurate, the \
process of transferring the information into long-term memory and retrieving it later \
frequently distorts the original information. It is thought that this distortion occurs because \
long-term memory relies heavily on semantic (meaning) features. For example, when \
subjects are asked to remember sentences, subjects are accurate if the delay is within 30 \
seconds, which requires access only to short-term memory. However, if the delay is longer \
than 30 seconds and the subjects therefore need to access long-term memory, they are more \
likely to identify a sentence with similar meaning but not the same wording. Other \
explanations for distortions of long-term memory include the fact that people frequently \
make inferences when hearing information or witnessing events (e.g., if someone says, \
"Fido was hit by a truck," we infer that Fido is a dog) and these inferences are filed into \
long-term memory. Furthermore, it seems that sources of information (where the \
information was heard) are less accurately filed than the information itself (what was \
heard). Areas in which the accuracy of long-term memory has significantly come into \
question include eyewitness reports and repressed memories. \
\
>EYEWITNESS REPORTS    Researchers have repeatedly cautioned against the \
reliability of eyewitnesses. In research, inaccurate memories commonly involve \
\
\
\
                                     Section 10- Memory: Stages of Memory \
\
misidentifying innocent people in mugshots and lineups in staged crimes. Furthermore, \
people frequently report inaccurate memories with a high degree of confidence. \
\
>REPRESSED MEMORIES The area of repressed memories has stirred heated debate. \
Repressed memories include memories of traumatic events that are thought by some to \
have been completely repressed and therefore inaccessible to memory for years or even \
decades. Evidence against repressed memories comes from the finding that most people \
who have witnessed a violent crime or are victims of abuse have trouble forgetting rather \
than remembering the event. Memory experts believe that it is rare for people to first \
recover memories of early childhood abuse years after the abuse has taken place. \
Furthermore, it is possible to construct convincing false memories for events that never \
happened. \
\
\
 \
\
                                   Section 10 - Memory: Classification of Memory \
\
      10.2 CLASSIFICATION OF MEMORY \
\
Many different classification schemas for memory exist. One classification schema divides \
memory into declarative or explicit memory, and procedural or implicit memory. \
\
>DECLARATIVE MEMORY Declarative or explicit memory involves conscious \
recollection of information or experience. Declarative memory is further divided into \
semantic and episodic memory. \
\
     SEMANTIC MEMORY   Semantic memory refers to our memory of meanings \
     of words, facts and how they relate to each other, for example, knowing that there \
     are twelve months in one year. Semantic memory depends upon our capacity to \
     recall abstract information or images. \
\
     EPISODIC MEMORY Episodic memory, by contrast, refers to the capacity to \
     recall autobiographical events, or when and where a specific event occurred, for \
     example, recalling your birthday party, or what you ate for breakfast today. \
     Retrieval from episodic memory involves reconstructing the original event in one's \
     mind. Overall, it is believed that determining the meaning of something requires \
     one type of memory, while knowing when or where it was learned involves a \
     different type of memory. \
\
>PROCEDURAL MEMORY Procedural, implicit, or nondeclarative memory involves \
the recollection of skills, physical operations, and procedures that are remembered \
automatically without conscious awareness. Procedural memories are not stored with \
respect to specific times or places. An example of procedural memory is remembering how \
to ride a bicycle even after not riding for ten years. \
\
\
\
                                     Section 10 - Memory: Biology of Memory \
\
        10.3 THE BIOLOGY OF MEMORY \
\
Many early studies of memory focused on attempting to identify neural locations of \
memory. Between 1915 and 1950 Karl Lashley completed hundreds of experiments \
involving either the removal of the cortex, or cutting of fiber pathways, and concluded that \
it was not possible to localize memory anywhere in the nervous system. Only three years \
later, however, William Scoville operated on H.M. in an attempt to stop uncontrollable \
seizure activity, and bilaterally removed H.M.'s temporal lobes. While H.M. was still very \
much able to remember things from the distant past, and had normal short-term memory \
capacity, H.M. developed complete anterograde amnesia (memory for events occurring \
after the surgery). This surgery highlighted the critical role of the hippocampus in the \
consolidation of long-term memory. At the same time, these findings also strengthened the \
belief that there is no single location for memory, because even though H.M. couldn't form \
new memories, his old ones remained intact. \
\
Further research has suggested that there are certain areas that are particularly involved in \
memory, including the frontal lobe (increased susceptibility to interference and problems \
with short-term memory), the temporal cortex, the hippocampus, thalamus, mamillary \
bodies, and the basal forebrain. Research has also pointed to the importance of the \
neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh), and problems with production of ACh in persons \
with Alzheimer's. \
\
The physiological process by which short-term memories become long-term memories has \
been described as long-term potentiation (LTP). It is believed that repeated stimulation \
of a synapse (e.g., through rehearsal) leads to chemical and structural changes in the \
dendrite of the receiving neuron, whereby this change results in increased sensitivity of the \
neuron to stimulation. Research also suggests that changes in the dendrites associated with \
LTP involve enzymes called kinases. \
\
\
 \
\
                                         Section 10 - Memory: Forgetting \
\
                 10.4 FORGETTING \
\
Ebbinghaus was one of the first researchers to study forgetting, as well as memory (largely \
using himself as his subject). When he plotted curves depicting memory of nonsense \
syllable lists that had been fully memorized, he found that the greatest amount of forgetting \
took place within the first hour. Fortunately, this forgetting does not apply to memory of \
material that is meaningful to us! \
\
On immediate recall of word lists, people remember those words at the beginning and at \
the end of the list better than those in the middle. This phenomenon is termed the serial \
position effect. On delayed recall, words at the beginning of the list are remembered best, \
while those in the middle and at the end of the list are remembered to an equivalent degree. \
\
I. TYPES OF AMNESIA \
\
>ANTEROGRADE AMNESIA Anterograde amnesia is impairment in acquiring new \
memories (e.g., after an accident, a brain-injured patient has difficulty remembering new \
people, what was done each day, etc.). \
\
>RETROGRADE AMNESIA Retrograde amnesia involves the loss of memories for \
events that occurred before an injury or disease (e.g., the day before a car accident). \
\
>POSTTRAUMATIC AMNESIA Posttraumatic amnesia involves the loss of memory \
for events occurring a short time after a trauma (e.g., the first few days after a course of \
ECT). \
\
>PARAMNESIA   Paramnesia is a distortion of memory and involves confabulation, or \
the type of errors made when someone is attempting to reconstruct the past. \
\
II. FACTORS INVOLVED IN FORGETTING \
\
A variety of theories have been proposed to explain forgetting. \
\
>RETRIEVAL FAILURE Retrieval failures occur when information that has been \
stored in long-term memory cannot be retrieved or recovered. An example is the "tip-of- \
\
\
\
                                         Section 10 - Memory: Forgetting \
\
the-tongue" phenomenon in which we can't recall a word or name that we are sure we \
 know. \
\
>INTERFERENCE Interference theory proposes that we forget because other material \
interferes with the ability to learn or retrieve the target material. \
\
     RETROACTIVE INTERFERENCE    Retroactive interference (inhibition) \
     occurs when recently learned material interferes with the ability to recall material \
     learned in the past. For example, after reading the section on memory, you have \
     trouble remembering what you learned from the physiological psychology lecture \
     two months ago. \
\
     PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE   Proactive interference (inhibition) occurs \
     when previously learned material interferes with the ability to learn or recall current \
     material. For example, what you learned about physiological psychology two \
     months ago is interfering with remembering the memory section that you are \
     currently studying. \
\
>DECAY Decay theory proposes that memory deteriorates with the passage of time. \
Experimental support for this theory has been difficult to obtain because it is difficult to \
separate out the effects of decay from those of interference. \
\
>MOOD-CONGRUENT MEMORY Mood-congruent memory is the tendency for \
 people to remember material better when their emotional state matches the state they were \
in when they learned the material. This helps explains why people who are highly anxious \
when taking an exam may have difficulty retrieving material they learned while studying \
in a non-anxious or at least a less anxious state. This tendency also explains why depressed \
people typically remember best those times in their past when they have been depressed \
before, and have more difficulty remembering good times. \
\
>STATE-DEPENDENT MEMORY State-dependent memory is the tendency for people \
to remember material better when they are in a state similar to the state they were in when \
the learning took place. For example, if you studied for the exam under the influence of \
marijuana, you may perform better if you use marijuana just prior to taking the exam (but \
we don't recommend trying this out!). \
\
>MOTIVATED FORGETTING Motivated forgetting (repression), a concept developed \
by Freud, involves the unconscious active blocking of painful or disturbing memories. \
\
\
 \
\
                                     Section 10 - Memory: Enhancing Memory \
\
           10.5 ENHANCING MEMORY \
\
The following strategies and approaches can be used to enhance memory. \
\
>CHUNKING   Chunking involves combining separate items of information into \
meaningful units. Chunking improves short-term memory. \
\
>IMAGERY AND ASSOCIATION Imagery or association techniques can enhance \
memory. For example, when memorizing pairs of words, an image can be used to provide \
a meaningful link between the two words; for example, pen and ocean can be remembered \
by visualizing a pen floating in the ocean. \
\
>RECREATION OF CONTEXT Recreation of context involves mentally reviewing \
information associated with the material to be remembered. For example, if a subject were \
trying to remember the hair color of his first-grade teacher, he would be helped by \
remembering everything he could about the first-grade classroom, the teacher's tone of \
voice, etc. \
\
>STUDY STRATEGIES Study strategies to enhance memory include distributed \
practice (i.e., studying is spaced out) rather than massed practice (cramming). Also, \
material is less likely to be forgotten if it is rehearsed at regularly spaced intervals. \
\
>MNEMONICS Mnemonics are memory-enhancing strategies, and include the method \
of loci, the peg-word system, word associations, and the substitute word system. \
\
     THE METHOD OF LOCI The method of loci involves forming a visual image \
     of items on one's list and putting each in a specific place as one mentally walks \
     through a room. For example, a person trying to recall a list of grocery items may \
     initially picture bread on the front door, cereal in the kitchen, and milk on the dining \
     room table. \
\
     THE PEG-WORD SYSTEM The peg-word system first involves memorizing a \
     set of ten visual images that can be pegs on which to hang ideas, e.g., one is bun, \
     two is shoe, etc. Then the person associates each image with what is to be \
    remembered, for example, if the person is trying to remember a list of items to buy. \
     he may associate ketchup with hamburger buns, or socks with shoe, etc. \
\
\
\
                                    Section 10 - Memory: Enhancing Memory \
\
     WORD ASSOCIATIONS Word association involves forming words or sentences \
     with the first letter of the items being memorized, or making up stories that connect \
     the items together. Word associations can also be used to create verbal associations \
     for items to be learned, e.g., RIASEC for Holland's occupational themes. \
\
     THE SUBSTITUTE WORD TECHNIQUE In the substitute word technique, \
     the person breaks down the word to be remembered into parts, and substitutes \
     words that are more familiar and can be visualized. For example, a person who \
     wants to memorize the word "catabolize" would break it into "cat," "a ball," "eyes," \
     and then form a visual image of these words. \
\
\
 \
\
                   \
\
               ASSESSMENT \
\
                      SECTION 11 \
\
                    PsychPrep \
                    PASS EFFICIENTLY \
\
         SECTION 11: ASSESSMENT \
\
              11.1 BASIC CONCEPTS \
\
>NORM-REFERENCED VERSUS CRITERION-REFERENCED SCORES    A \
norm-referenced score provides information on how a person performed relative to others \
in the group (e.g., standard scores, z scores, T scores, and percentiles). A criterion- \
referenced score provides information on how much of the content the person has mastered \
(e.g., the number of correct items obtained on the test, or percentage correct). \
\
>OBJECTIVE VERSUS SUBJECTIVE TESTS Tests are considered either objective \
or subjective, based on the scoring procedures. An objective test does not rely on a rater's \
judgment for scoring, and it has a scoring key used to score the items. Examples of \
objectively scored tests include the MMPI-2 and the EPPP. Subjectively scored tests \
involve some element of the rater's judgment, such as the TAT and the Rorschach. \
\
>NORMATIVE VERSUS IPSATIVE SCORES A normative score tells us how \
someone performed relative to others (e.g., t-score, percentile rank). An ipsative score \
provides information on the relative strengths and weaknesses of the person only, and does \
not compare the person to others. Vocational preference tests (e.g., the Strong Campbell) \
most commonly yield ipsative scores. \
\
>EMPIRICAL-CRITERION KEYING Empirical-criterion keying is a process for \
selecting items to be used in a test. The items are keyed to an external criterion, and are \
intended to differentiate between groups of people who have a particular trait and those \
who do not. For example, the developers of the MMPI first generated a pool of items for \
possible use on Scale 8 (the Schizophrenia Scale). Only those items that were found to \
differentiate between normal individuals and individuals with Schizophrenia were \
ultimately included in the test. \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 11 - Assessment: Intelligence and Intelligence Testing \
\
  11.2 INTELLIGENCE AND INTELLIGENCE \
                        TESTING \
\
I. THEORIES OF INTELLIGENCE \
\
Most researchers agree that intelligence is a set of cognitive characteristics and abilities \
that cannot be directly observed. Over the years, psychologists have basically been of two \
camps: those who argue that intelligence is a single general ability, and those who believe \
there are several distinct kinds of intelligence. \
\
>SPEARMAN   Spearman (1927) proposed that intelligence is a single factor, which he \
termed "g factor." This came out of Spearman's observation that scores on various tests \
of mental abilities tend to correlate with each other. The most widely used tests of \
intelligence (e.g .. the Wechsler tests and the Stanford-Binet) measure the "g factor." \
\
>THURSTONE Thurstone (1938) argued that there are seven distinct primary mental \
abilities: verbal comprehension, word fluency, numerical fluency, spatial visualization, \
associative memory, perceptual speed, and reasoning. \
\
>CATTELL After reanalyzing Thurstone's data, Cattell proposed that a "g factor" does \
exist, with two subtypes, fluid intelligence and crystallized intelligence. \
\
     FLUID INTELLIGENCE Fluid intelligence is the capacity to acquire new \
     knowledge and solve new problems, and it is partially determined by biological and \
     genetic factors. \
\
     CRYSTALLIZED   INTELLIGENCE   Crystallized intelligence refers to \
     knowledge and learning gained over one's lifetime through an interaction between \
     fluid intelligence and environment (culture, education, etc.). \
\
>CATTELL-HORN-CARROLL The result of extensive factor analyses, this theory is \
considered by many to be the most empirically validated theory of human intelligence. \
According to this theory, intelligence can be understood in three levels: general intelligence \
or "g" (stratum III); about ten broad cognitive abilities, such as fluid reasoning, short-term \
memory, visual processing, reading and writing (stratum II); and finally, about 70 narrow \
cognitive abilities (stratum I). This theory, based on the original work of Cattell, has gone \
\
\
\
                            Section 11 - Assessment: Intelligence and Intelligence Testing \
\
through much development and there is some variance in the way it can be presented. For \
example, Horn and Carroll disagree over the validity of the general intelligence factor (g), \
and the number of broad cognitive abilities (stratum II) varies in different versions of the \
model. \
\
>GARDNER'S MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES Gardner (1983, 1996) has identified \
eight distinct intelligences: linguistic, logical-mathematical, spatial, musical, bodily- \
kinesthetic, interpersonal, intrapersonal, and naturalistic. Gardner argues that people differ \
in their profile of intelligence, by which he means they have relative strengths and \
weaknesses among the eight areas. \
\
>STERNBERG'S TRIARCHIC THEORY    Sternberg's (1985) theory focuses on \
process rather than product, specifically the thinking processes used to arrive at answers to \
problems. Sternberg has proposed three aspects of intelligence: the internal components \
(e.g., those we use to acquire, store, perceive, and remember), the capacity to adapt to \
environmental changes, and the ability to apply past experience to current novel problems. \
\
II. THE WECHSLER ADULT INTELLIGENCE SCALE \
(WAIS-IV) \
\
The WAIS-IV (2008) is appropriate for persons from 16-0 to 90-11 years of age. The \
WAIS-IV consists of ten core subtests and five supplemental subtests. The WAIS-IV \
allows for the calculation of Full Scale IQ (FSIQ) score, four primary index scores, and an \
optional General Ability Index (GAI) score. IQ score and indexes have a mean of 100, and \
a standard deviation of 15. Subtests have a mean of 10 and a standard deviation of 3. \
\
>VERBAL COMPREHENSION INDEX (VCI)    The verbal comprehension index \
includes the subtests of similarities, vocabulary, and information. Comprehension is a \
supplemental subtest. \
\
>PERCEPTUAL REASONING INDEX (PRI) The perceptual reasoning index includes \
the subtests of block design, matrix reasoning, and visual puzzles. Picture completion and \
figure weights are supplemental subtests. \
\
>WORKING MEMORY INDEX (WMI) The working memory index consists of digit \
span and arithmetic. Letter-number sequencing is a supplemental subtest. \
\
\
 \
\
                            Section 11 - Assessment: Intelligence and Intelligence Testing \
\
>PROCESSING SPEED INDEX (PSI) The processing speed index consists of the \
subtests of symbol search and coding. Cancellation is a supplemental subtest. \
\
>GENERAL ABILITY INDEX (GAI) The optional general ability index consists of a \
composite of scores on the Verbal Comprehension and Perceptual Reasoning subtests. It is \
used when examiners want to calculate a summary score that minimizes the influence of \
Working Memory and Processing Speed. \
\
Although the WAIS-IV is clearly based on the Wechsler four-factor model, many of the \
subtests can be interpreted along the lines of the Cattell-Horn-Carroll three-strata model of \
intelligence (CHC model). The WAIS-IV subtests can be seen as representing various \
broad cognitive abilities of the CHC model (e.g., fluid reasoning, quantitative knowledge, \
crystallized knowledge, short term memory, visual perception). \
\
III. THE WECHSLER INTELLIGENCE SCALE FOR \
CHILDREN (WISC-V) \
\
The WISC-V (2014) measures intellectual ability and cognitive functioning in children \
from 6-0 to 16-11 years. The test consists of ten primary subtests and six secondary or \
optional subtests. The normative sample was stratified based on U.S. census data for age, \
sex, parent education level, geographic region, and race/ethnicity. A Spanish version is also \
available. \
\
In comparison to the WISC-IV, which it replaces, the WISC-V is quicker to administer, \
has new optional subtests, and has a greater variety of supplemental index scores. The \
perceptual reasoning index (PRI), found in the fourth edition of both the WAIS and the \
WISC, has been split into two separate indexes: the visual spatial index (VSI) and the fluid \
reasoning index (FRI). In addition to traditional paper-and-pencil administration and \
scoring, the WISC-V can be administered and scored digitally on tablets (the Q-interactive \
version). \
\
The WISC-V yields a Full Scale IQ (FSIQ) score along with five primary index scores. \
FSIQ and the indexes have a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15. Subtests have a \
mean of 10 and a standard deviation of 3. \
\
>VERBAL COMPREHENSION INDEX (VCI) The verbal comprehension index \
measures crystallized intelligence, including verbal concept formation, reasoning, and \
expression. The primary subtests are similarities and vocabulary. Secondary subtests \
include information and comprehension. \
\
\
\
                            Section 11 - Assessment: Intelligence and Intelligence Testing \
\
> VISUAL-SPATIAL INDEX (VSI) The visual-spatial index consists of the primary \
subtests of block design and visual puzzles. \
\
> FLUID REASONING INDEX (FRI) The fluid reasoning index measures induetive and \
quantitative reasoning. The primary subtests are matrix reasoning and figure weights. \
Secondary subtests include picture concepts and arithmetic. \
\
>WORKING MEMORY INDEX (WMI) The working memory index consists of the \
primary subtests of digit span and picture span. Letter-number sequencing is a secondary \
subtest. \
\
>PROCESSING SPEED INDEX (PSI) The processing speed index consists of the \
primary subtests of coding and symbol search. Cancellation is a secondary subtest. \
\
There are also several supplemental index scores that can be calculated by using different \
combinations of the primary subtests and/or the secondary subtests. Ancillary index scores \
include quantitative reasoning index, auditory working memory index, nonverbal index, \
general ability index, and cognitive proficiency index. In 2015, two more index scores were \
added: the verbal expanded crystallized index and the expanded fluid index. \
\
To aid in the assessment of specific learning disabilities, three complementary index scores \
can be calculated (naming speed index, symbol translation index, and storage and retrieval \
index). \
\
The WISC-V can be interpreted along the lines of the Cattell-Horn-Carroll model of \
intelligence, as well as other current structural models. Despite variation among different \
models, there is a general consensus that key underlying factors include verbal \
comprehension, visual spatial, fluid reasoning, working memory, and processing speed \
abilities. Each of these factors is represented by one of the five primary indexes of the \
WISC-V. \
\
Children with chronic middle ear infections (i.e., chronic otitis media) often demonstrate \
long-term deficits in language capacities. For this reason, when they are tested with the \
WISC-V, their scores on the verbal comprehension index will often be depressed. \
\
\
 \
\
                             Section 11 - Assessment: Intelligence and Intelligence Testing \
\
IV. INTELLIGENCE TEST INTERPRETATION \
\
VCI is a measure of verbal comprehension abilities, which typically are considered to be a \
form of crystallized intelligence. PRI (on the WAIS-IV) and FRI (on the WISC-V) measure \
perceptual reasoning/fluid abilities. Crystallized abilities generally do not decrease with \
aging; they remain intact and may even improve. Fluid abilities tend to peak in adolescence \
and decline thereafter, in a gradual but steady manner. \
\
There are several sociocultural and psychological factors that can affect VCI and PRI/FRI. \
People who are more educated and of higher SES may obtain higher VCI scores than \
PRI/FRI scores. Those of lower SES and less education may show the reverse pattern. \
\
The VCI subtests also tend to be more culturally loaded than the PRI/FRI subtests. The \
VCI subtests may therefore not be appropriate for persons of a different cultural \
background or those who have limited facility with English because they might \
underestimate the person's intelligence. The PRI/FRI subtests, on the other hand, would \
not be appropriate for persons who have impaired motor functioning. \
\
In terms of psychological functioning, the PRI/FRI subtests are more susceptible to effects \
of anxiety and depression. Additionally, persons with a history of substance dependence or \
schizophrenia have a tendency for PRI/FRI to be lower than VCI. \
\
Vocabulary and information are considered to be the two best "hold tests," which means \
that if a person sustains brain damage or injury, performance on these subtests tends to \
hold steady and not decline. In other words, these subtests are good indicators of pre- \
morbid intellectual functioning. \
\
Aging affects some subtests more than others. Overall, scores on the WAIS on both the \
processing speed index (PSI) and the perceptual reasoning index (PRI) decline as people \
age but scores on the processing speed index (PSI) decline more significantly. Scores on \
the verbal comprehension index (VCI) do not tend to decline. Scores on the working \
memory index (WMI) decline slightly overall. \
\
Scatter analysis or pattern analysis looks at discrepancies between subtests. Such analysis \
has not been found to be valid for making diagnoses, and, in particular, can result in too \
many false positives. Measurement error alone may account for differences noted between \
subtests. \
\
\
\
                            Section 11 - Assessment: Intelligence and Intelligence Testing \
\
V. INTELLIGENCE TEST SELECTION \
\
>DIAGNOSING INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY AND GIFTEDNESS Intelligence \
is normally distributed in the population. Using the areas under the normal curve, it can be \
said that about 99% of the population have IQs between 55 and 145 (between +3 and -3 \
SDs); about 95% of the population have IQs between 70 and 130 (between +2 and -2 SDs); \
about 68% or two thirds of the population have IQs between 85 and 115 (between +1 and \
-1 SDs); and 50% of the population have IQs between 90 and 110. \
\
To be diagnosed with intellectual disability, a person's IQ is typically 70 or below, or two \
or more standard deviations below the mean. In addition, the person must show evidence \
of deficits in adaptive functioning in one or more areas (e.g., conceptual/academic domain, \
social domain, and practical domain) across multiple environments (e.g., school, home, \
work). Adaptive functioning frequently assessed by means of the Vineland Test of \
Adaptive Functioning. \
\
The term floor refers to the lowest possible score that a test can yield, and ceiling refers to \
the highest possible score. Intellectual disability is best assessed by an intelligence test with \
a fairly low floor. Similarly, giftedness is best assessed by a test with a fairly high ceiling. \
\
The WISC-IV has a high floor (IQ of 40) and a low ceiling (IQ of 160), which limits its \
usefulness for assessing someone with an IQ lower than 40 or higher than 160. The \
Stanford-Binet 5, in contrast, has a much lower floor (e.g., IQ score in the teens) and a \
much higher ceiling (IQ of 180), thus making it the test of choice for assessing both \
giftedness and intellectual disability. \
\
>NON-VERBAL TESTS OF INTELLIGENCE   Raven's Progressive Matrices is \
generally thought to be one of the best non-verbal tests of intelligence. In fact, Spearman \
himself considered it to be the best non-verbal measure of the "g factor." The test consists \
of a series of abstract patterns with one piece missing. The test-taker must select the missing \
piece using a multiple choice format. The test is appropriate for children as well as adults. \
\
>INFANT TESTS OF INTELLIGENCE   Infant tests of intelligence, such as the \
Bayley, tend to be poor predictors of intelligence in later years because these tests assess \
abilities (e.g., sensorimotor skills) different from those assessed by child or adult \
intelligence tests (e.g., verbal comprehension, perceptual organization). The one exception \
is that extremely low performance on an infant intelligence test tends to correlate with, or \
predict, lower intelligence in subsequent years. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 11 - Assessment: Objective Personality Tests \
\
    11.3 OBJECTIVE PERSONALITY TESTS \
\
I. MMPI-2/MMPI-2-RF \
\
The MMPI-2 is an objective self-report measure of personality functioning. It contains 567 \
true-false items. The MMPI-2 is scored with T scores, which have a mean of 50 and a \
standard deviation of 10. Scores at or above a T score of 65 (1.5 standard deviations above \
the mean) are considered significant. \
\
Empirical-criterion keying was used in developing the original MMPI, but it was not used \
with the MMPI-2. \
\
The MMPI-2 includes several validity scales. The most frequently cited validity scales are \
L. F, and K, which not only can help determine whether the profile is valid, but also can \
provide information on test-taking approach. \
\
       L SCALE L is the lie scale. A high score on this scale indicates that the person \
       is making a naive attempt to present him or herself in an overly favorable light. \
       The L scale is typically in the normal range. \
\
       F SCALE F is the infrequency ("fake bad") scale, and includes items that \
       were endorsed by less than 10% of people in the standardization sample. High \
       scores on the F scale suggest psychotic processes, a tremendous degree of \
       distress, or an attempt to appear in a negative light that could reflect a cry for \
       help. Extremely high scores (T of 100 or above) are suggestive of malingering \
       and would invalidate the profile. \
\
       K SCALE The K scale is the guardedness scale. High scores suggest that the \
       person is making a more sophisticated attempt to present him or herself in a \
       positive light ("fake good"). A low score on K is suggestive of someone who is \
       excessively open, has poor ego strength, and tends to openly reveal his or her \
       negative aspects. \
\
K is used to correct for guardedness based on a formula. The K correction uses the score \
on K to adjust some of the clinical scales for guardedness; the higher the person's score on \
K, the more points are added to several of the clinical scales. \
\
\
\
                                Section 11 - Assessment: Objective Personality Tests \
\
When test-takers are attempting to "fake good" on the MMPI-2, they typically have a low \
F and high K. When they are attempting to "fake bad," they typically have a high F and \
low K. \
\
The 10 clinical scales on the MMPI-2 serve as clinical/ personality indices, \
\
        SCALE 1 - HYPOCHONDRIASIS (HS) High scorers have a variety of \
       physical complaints and are illness-focused. They are commonly immature, \
       egocentric, complaining, and pessimistic. \
\
        SCALE 2 - DEPRESSION (D) This scale measures depression, general \
       dissatisfaction, and pessimism. Elevations suggest guilt, indecision, self- \
       criticism, low self-esteem, and a tendency to withdraw. \
\
        SCALE 3 - HYSTERIA (HY) High scores indicate physical complaints as \
       well as a defensive denial of emotional or interpersonal problems, demand for \
       affection and support, and social disinhibition. \
\
       SCALE 4 - PSYCHOPATHIC DEVIATE (PD) Pd measures the general \
       level of social adjustment. High scorers are frequently manipulative, hostile, \
       impulsive, have poor judgment, and have problems with authority, \
       commitments, and family. Substance use is common with elevations on Pd. \
\
        SCALE 5 - MASCULINITY-FEMININITY (MF) Male high scorers have \
       aesthetic interests and express warmth, while low scorers have traditionally \
       more masculine interests. High scoring females endorse traditionally male \
       interests and are confident and logical, while low scoring females may be \
       passive and yielding. \
\
        SCALE 6 -- PARANOIA (PA) High scorers are suspicious, resentful, angry. \
       and externalize blame. High scorers tend to misinterpret others' motives and \
       are interpersonally sensitive. \
\
        SCALE 7 - PSYCHASTHENIA (PT) High scores indicate fears, anxieties, \
       compulsions, obsessions, indecisiveness, and ruminative self-doubt. Elevations \
       suggest tension, worry, and uncertainty. Along with Scale 2, an elevation on \
       this scale is a good overall measure of distress. \
\
\
 \
\
                                 Section 11 - Assessment: Objective Personality Tests \
\
        SCALE 8 -- SCHIZOPHRENIA (SC) High scores indicate feelings of social \
       and/or emotional alienation and misunderstanding, confusion and \
       disorganization, as well as lability and impulsivity. Extremely high scores are \
       consistent with poor contact with reality, unusual thinking, delusions, and \
       hallucinations. \
\
        SCALE 9 - HYPOMANIA (MA) High scores suggest overactivity, poor \
       impulse control, excessive speech, flight of ideas, agitation, grandiosity, \
       restlessness, and irritability. \
\
        SCALE 0 -- SOCIAL INTROVERSION (SI) High scorers are typically shy, \
       unassertive, lack confidence, and have limited social skills and interactions. \
\
The MMPI-2 also contains a number of supplementary scales including scales to measure \
actual or potential substance abuse (MAC-R, APS, AAS), PTSD (PK - Keane Post \
Traumatic Stress Disorder and PS - PTSD Schlenger), marital distress (MDS), \
overcontrolled hostility (O-H), anxiety (A), repression (R), ego strength (Es), dominance \
(Do), and social responsibility (Re). \
\
The MMPI-2-RF (Restructured Form) (2008) consists of 338 items linked to current \
models of psychopathology and personality. With the restructured clinical scales at its core \
the MMPI-2-RF consists of 8 Validity Scales, 12 Higher-Order (H-O) and Restructured \
Clinical (RC) Scales, 14 Somatic/Cognitive and Internalizing Scales, 11 Externalizing, \
Interpersonal, and Interest Scales, and 5 Personality Psychopathology Five (PSY-5) Scales. \
Test developers note that the MMPI-2-RF provides an alternative to the MMPI-2, not a \
replacement. \
\
II. MCMI-IV \
\
The Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI-IV, 2015) is an objective measure of \
personality consisting of 195 true-false items. Aligned with the DSM-5, the MCMI-IV \
measures both more enduring personality characteristics/disorders, as well as more acute \
clinical symptoms/disorders. \
\
Because the test was normed on a clinical population, it should generally not be used with \
a normal population. When administered to a non-clinical population, the MCMI-IV tends \
to exaggerate pathology. \
\
\
\
                                Section 11 - Assessment: Projective Personality Tests \
\
   11.4 PROJECTIVE PERSONALITY TESTS \
\
The premise underlying projective testing is the projective hypothesis. When persons are \
presented with unstructured stimuli to interpret or elaborate upon, it is believed that they \
project material from their unconscious onto the stimuli. Thus their interpretations and \
elaborations will reveal unconscious material from their psyche, such as repressed wishes, \
conflicts, and preoccupations. \
\
I. RORSCHACH \
\
The Rorschach is a projective personality test consisting of ten symmetrical inkblots. The \
overall goal of assessment with the Rorschach is to assess the client's personality structure: \
the emotional, behavioral, interpersonal, perceptual, and cognitive aspects of the person's \
functioning. Historically, Exner's Rorschach Comprehensive System (RCS) has been the \
most widely used system. In this scoring system, every Rorschach response is scored on a \
variety of dimensions. \
\
     CONTENT Content includes the specific category a response belongs to, e.g .. \
     Clothing, Science, Whole Human. \
\
     LOCATION Location refers to the area of the blot that the person used to develop \
     the response, e.g., whole blot (W), detail (D), small detail (Dd), or white space (S). \
\
     FORM QUALITY Form quality is determined by how accurately the response \
     relates to the form of the inkblot. \
\
     DEVELOPMENTAL QUALITY    Developmental quality is determined by \
     evaluating each response in terms of its degree of integration. \
\
In 2011, the R-PAS (Rorschach Performance Assessment System) was published. The R- \
PAS is a significant reformulation of the Rorschach. It is an internationally oriented \
approach, designed to decrease variability among examiners, align the test with an \
evidence base, and simplify procedures and presentation of data. \
\
\
 \
\
                                        Section 11 - Assessment: Other Tests \
\
                  11.5 OTHER TESTS \
\
 I. NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS AND BATTERIES \
\
 Neuropsychological tests measure perceptual, motor, verbal, memory, and cognitive \
 functioning. Neuropsychological testing measures the functional impact of brain damage \
 (e.g., stroke, head trauma) or disease processes (e.g .. Alzheimer's disease), as well as the \
 strengths and weaknesses of a patient. \
\
 Some tests are specifically designed to measure one area of functioning. For example, the \
 Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-IV) measures memory (verbal and nonverbal); the \
 Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and the Stroop Test measure cognitive functioning \
 (problem solving and cognitive flexibility); and the Bender Visual-Motor Gestalt Test \
 measures perceptual/motor abilities. \
\
Neuropsychological test batteries (e.g., the Halstead Reitan and Luria Nebraska) are \
 designed to comprehensively sample the patient's neuropsychological functioning. \
\
 The Folstein Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) is a brief, easy to administer test used to \
 screen for cognitive impairment as well as to follow the course of cognitive changes over \
 time. \
\
 II. ACHIEVEMENT TESTS \
\
 Achievement tests, such as the Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT) or Wechsler \
 Individual Achievement Test (WIAT), are used to assess academic achievement. A specific \
 learning disorder is diagnosed when the affected academic skills (e.g., reading, written \
 expression, mathematics) are substantially below those expected for the person's age, and \
 the learning problem interferes with academic/occupational performance or activities of \
 daily living. The criteria for substantially below are achievement test scores that are at least \
 1.5 standard deviations (SD) below the population mean for age (below the 7th percentile), \
 not better accounted for by intellectual disabilities. \
\
 \
\
                                        Section 11 - Assessment: Other Tests \
\
 III. THE VINELAND \
\
 The Vineland is a test of adaptive functioning often used as part of an assessment of \
 intellectual disability. A diagnosis of intellectual disability requires deficits in general \
 mental abilities (typically an IQ score of 70 or below) as well as deficits in adaptive \
 functioning in one or more areas (e.g., conceptual/academic domain, social domain, and \
 practical domain) across multiple environments (e.g., school, home, work). \
\
 \
 \
\
                  KEY      TERMS \
\
                      SECTION 12 \
\
                     PsychPrep \
                     PASS EFFICIENTLY \
\
                                        Section 12 - Key Terms: Learning \
\
           SECTION 12: KEY TERMS \
\
              SECTION 1: LEARNING \
\
Skinner, Pavlov, Watson, Thorndike \
\
classical versus operant conditioning \
\
unconditioned versus conditioned stimulus/response \
\
backward versus standard conditioning \
\
stimulus (mediated) generalization versus response generalization \
\
classical versus operant extinction \
\
spontaneous recovery versus response burst \
\
habituation versus satiation \
\
stimulus discrimination and experimental neurosis \
\
higher order conditioning \
\
reinforcement versus punishment (time out, nagging, response cost) \
\
positive and negative reinforcement versus positive and negative punishment \
\
continuous versus intermittent reinforcement \
\
VR/FR/VI/FI schedules: operant strength during acquisition, extinction, scalloping \
\
superstitious behavior versus pseudoconditioning \
\
chaining versus shaping \
\
\
 \
\
                                         Section 12- Key Terms: Learning \
\
thinning versus fading \
\
behavioral contrast \
\
Premack principle \
\
reciprocal determinism \
\
\
\
                               Section 12 - Key Terms: Biological Bases of Behavior \
\
     SECTION 2: BIOLOGICAL BASES OF \
                      BEHAVIOR \
\
central (CNS) versus peripheral (PNS) nervous system \
\
autonomic (ANS) versus somatic (SNS) nervous system \
\
sympathetic versus parasympathetic nervous system \
\
quadriplegia versus paraplegia versus paresis \
\
left versus right hemisphere \
\
Broca's versus Wernicke's aphasia versus conduction aphasia versus global aphasia \
\
parietal lobes: somatosensory processing, proprioception \
\
frontal lobes: personality, abstract thinking, planning, ability to shift sets \
\
occipital: vision \
\
temporal lobes: hearing, emotions, memory \
\
corpus callosum and split-brain patients \
\
thalamus versus hypothalamus \
\
Kluver-Bucy syndrome versus septal rage syndrome \
\
cerebellum, pons, medulla, RAS \
\
all or none law \
\
inhibitory versus excitatory neurotransmitters \
\
agonists versus antagonists \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/3 \
 \
\
                                Section 12 - Key Terms: Biological Bases of Behavior \
\
acetylcholine, catecholamines, serotonin \
\
role of dopamine in schizophrenia and Parkinson's \
\
roles of serotonin and norepinephrine in depression and mania \
\
role of GABA in anxiety \
\
enkephalins and endorphins \
\
hypothyroidism versus hyperthyroidism \
\
Addison's versus Cushing's disease \
\
Mild versus major neurocognitive disorder versus delirium \
\
Alzheimer's versus vascular neurocognitive disorder \
\
subcortical versus cortical neurocognitive disorder \
\
Huntington's disease \
\
concussion versus contusion \
\
post-concussion syndrome \
\
open-head versus closed-head injuries \
\
neurocognitive disorder versus pseudo-dementia \
\
Korsakoff's syndrome \
\
retrograde versus anterograde amnesia \
\
effects of bilateral versus unilateral ECT \
\
gate control theory of pain \
\
stages of sleep: REM versus non-REM \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/4 \
\
                                Section 12 - Key Terms: Biological Bases of Behavior \
\
generalized versus partial seizures \
\
tonic clonic versus petit mal seizures \
\
PET scan versus MRI versus CAT scan \
\
positive versus negative symptoms of schizophrenia \
\
side effects of antipsychotics and mechanisms of action \
\
EPS versus tardive dyskinesia versus agranulocytosis \
\
TCAs versus MAOIs versus SSRIs \
\
mechanisms of action of antidepressants \
\
withdrawal from alcohol and benzodiazepines: seizures, hallucinations, and possibly fatal \
\
lithium toxicity \
\
meds for major categories of disorders \
\
pain management and meds \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/5 \
 \
\
                                          Section 12 - Key Terms: Ethics \
\
                SECTION 3: ETHICS \
\
principles versus standards \
\
consultation versus supervision versus training versus referring out \
\
multiple relationships versus bartering \
\
testimonials \
\
sex with patients versus treating former sexual partners \
\
subpoena versus court order \
\
court-appointed evaluation versus court-ordered therapy \
\
expert witness \
\
child custody evaluation \
\
formal versus informal resolution of colleagues' misconduct \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/6 \
\
                                Section 12 - Key Terms: \
\
                     SECTION 4: \
\
       INDUSTRIAL/ORGANIZATIONAL \
\
adverse impact versus unfairness versus differential validity \
\
job analysis versus job evaluation \
\
biodata \
\
Holland's occupational themes, personality-job fit theory \
\
assessment centers; in-basket techniques \
\
contrast versus halo effect \
\
cognitive ability versus interest versus personality tests \
\
comparative versus individual or absolute methods of appraisal \
\
BARS versus BOS \
\
forced choice versus paired comparisons versus forced distribution \
\
effects of training \
\
job rotation and Japanese management \
\
scientific management versus human relations approach \
\
Theory X versus Theory Y versus Theory Z \
\
authoritarian versus democratic versus laissez faire \
\
LPC theory \
\
PSYCHPREP       Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/7 \
 \
\
                                 Section 12 - Key Terms: Industrial/Organizational \
\
transactional versus transformational leader \
\
five types of power \
\
rational economic versus administrative decision making \
\
two-factor theory of motivation: hygiene, motivators, satisfiers, dissatisfies, \
content, context \
\
job enrichment versus enlargement \
\
goals and feedback \
\
VIE theory versus equity theory \
\
job satisfaction: correlations with age, race, occupational level, productivity, turnover \
\
human factors versus psychological approach \
\
QWL versus QCC \
\
Organizational Development (OD) \
\
centralized versus decentralized communication \
\
risky shift versus response polarization versus group think \
\
overlearning \
\
compressed work week versus flextime \
\
noise in the workplace \
\
most stressed workers \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/Key Terms/8 \
\
                                  Section 12- Key Terms: Treatment/Interventions \
\
 SECTION 5: TREATMENT/INTERVENTIONS \
\
counterconditioning versus extinction \
\
aversive conditioning versus systematic desensitization \
\
exposure (flooding) versus implosive therapy \
\
primary, secondary, and generalized reinforcers \
\
self-control procedures: self-monitoring versus stimulus control \
\
optimizing effects of punishment \
\
escape versus avoidance learning \
\
symbolic versus live versus participant modeling \
\
Kohler versus Tolman \
\
Beck versus Ellis \
\
cognitive triad of depression \
\
self-instructional training versus stress inoculation \
\
protocol analysis \
\
Rehm's self-control theory of depression \
\
pleasure versus reality principle \
\
primary versus secondary process \
\
repression and other defense mechanisms \
\
transference and countertransference \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/9 \
 \
\
                                  Section 12- Key Terms; Treatment/Interventions \
\
ego psychology versus object relations versus neo-Freudian versus self psychology \
\
defensive versus adaptive functions of the ego \
\
object permanence versus object constancy \
\
neo-Freudians: focus on social and cultural factors \
\
teleological versus deterministic \
\
Adler: social interest, struggle for superiority, STEP \
\
Jung: archetypes, personal and collective unconscious, transference \
\
Jung versus Freud \
\
phenomenological perspective \
\
empathy, unconditional positive regard, congruence \
\
introjection, projection, retroflection, deflection, and confluence \
\
reality therapy: focus on responsibility \
\
hypnosis: subjective experiential change, anesthesia, pain control \
\
biofeedback: EMG, EEG, EDR, and temperature \
\
biofeedback: focus on decreased arousal of the sympathetic nervous system \
\
feminist therapy: focus on socio-political climate, egalitarian relationship \
\
negative versus positive feedback loop \
\
object relational family therapy \
\
boundaries and hierarchy \
\
coalition versus triangulation versus joining \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/10 \
\
                                  Section 12-Key Terms. Treatment/Interventions \
\
disengaged versus enmeshed \
\
double bind versus paradox \
\
multigenerational transmission process and undifferentiated family ego mass \
\
social learning family therapy: deficient rewards and communication deficits \
\
most effective components of groups: cohesiveness, catharsis, and self-understanding \
\
crisis-intervention versus brief therapy \
\
client-centered case consultation, consultee-centered case consultation, program-centered \
administrative consultation, and consultee-centered administrative consultation \
\
primary versus secondary versus tertiary prevention \
\
summative versus formative evaluation \
\
effects of divorce \
\
effects of working mothers \
\
meta-analysis: effect size (Smith and Glass) \
\
minorities in treatment, dropouts \
\
best option for violent husband \
\
\
 \
\
                                      Section 12 - Key Terms: Research Design \
\
         SECTION 6: RESEARCH DESIGN, \
    STATISTICS, AND TEST CONSTRUCTION \
\
 RESEARCH DESIGN \
\
 IV versus DV \
\
 true experiment versus quasi-experiment versus observational \
\
 group versus single subject design \
\
 AB versus ABAB versus multiple baseline versus simultaneous treatment versus changing \
 criterion \
\
 simple random sampling versus stratified random sampling versus proportional sampling \
 versus cluster sampling versus systematic sampling \
\
 interval recording versus event sampling \
\
 threats to internal validity: history, maturation, testing, instrumentation, statistical \
 regression, selection bias, attrition, and diffusion \
\
 threats to construct validity: attention and contact with clients, experimenter expectancies, \
 and demand characteristics \
\
 threats to external validity: sample characteristics, stimulus characteristics, and contextual \
 characteristics \
\
 threats to statistical conclusion validity: low power, unreliability of measures, unreliability \
 of procedures, and subject heterogeneity \
\
 PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/12 \
\
                                         Section 12 - Key Terms: Statistics \
\
 STATISTICS \
\
 nominal versus ordinal versus interval versus ratio data \
\
descriptive versus inferential statistics \
\
 mean versus mode versus median \
\
standard deviation versus range versus variance \
\
 criterion-referenced versus norm-referenced scores \
\
z scores \
\
standard error of the mean and central limits theorem \
\
 null hypothesis versus alternate hypothesis \
\
 rejection versus retention region \
\
 alpha versus beta \
\
 Type I versus Type II error \
\
 power \
\
 t-test versus ANOVA \
\
 one-way ANOVA versus factorial ANOVA \
\
split-plot ANOVA versus randomized block ANOVA versus repeated measures ANOVA \
\
MANOVA versus ANCOVA \
\
main versus interaction effects \
\
trend analysis \
\
bivariate versus multivariate correlation \
\
\
 \
\
                                               Section 12 - Key Terms: Statistics \
\
 least squares criterion \
\
 Pearson r versus eta versus biserial correlation \
\
 zero-order versus partial versus semipartial correlation \
\
 multiple R versus canonical versus discriminant versus loglinear correlation \
\
 multicollinearity \
\
 correlation versus regression \
\
 path analysis versus LISREL \
\
 orthogonal versus oblique \
\
 factor analysis versus cluster analysis \
\
 \
\
                                          Section 12 - Key Terms: Test Construction \
\
 TEST CONSTRUCTION \
\
 reliability versus validity \
\
 test-retest versus parallel form versus internal consistency versus interrater reliability \
\
 Spearman-Brown prophecy formula \
\
 split-half versus coefficient alpha, and Kuder-Richardson \
\
standard error of measurement \
\
 calculating confidence intervals \
\
content versus criterion-related versus construct validity \
\
concurrent versus predictive validity \
\
standard error of estimate \
\
Taylor-Russell tables: base rate, selection ratio, and incremental validity \
\
false positives versus true positives versus false negatives versus true negatives \
\
multi-trait multi-method matrix \
\
convergent versus divergent (discriminant) validity \
\
classical test theory versus item response theory (item characteristics curve) \
\
PSYCHPREP           Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/15 \
 \
\
                                  Section 12 - Key Terms: Social and Multicultural \
\
 SECTION 7: SOCIAL AND MULTICULTURAL \
\
attributions: internal, external, situational, dispositional \
\
depression: internal, stable, global attributions \
\
fundamental attribution error versus self-serving bias versus actor-observer bias \
\
cognitive dissonance versus self-perception theory \
\
persuasion: primacy effect (long gap) versus recency effect (short gap) \
\
superordinate goals \
\
bystander apathy and diffusion of responsibility \
\
aggression: frustration-aggression versus social learning theory \
\
conformity versus obedience \
\
foot-in-the door versus door-in-the-face \
\
deindividuation \
\
social facilitation versus inhibition \
\
social buffer effect \
\
inner city teachers' expectations of kids \
\
similarity hypothesis versus reciprocity hypothesis versus propinquity hypothesis versus \
matching hypothesis \
\
approach-approach versus approach-avoidance versus avoidance-avoidance \
\
etic versus emic \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/16 \
\
                                  Section 12 - Key Terms: Social and Multicultural \
\
high context versus low context \
\
stages of racial or cultural identity \
\
acculturation \
\
cultural encapsulation \
\
collateral versus individualistic perspective \
\
treatment approaches with diverse ethnic groups \
\
cultural concepts of distress: cultural syndromes, cultural idioms of distress, cultural \
explanations or perceived causes \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/17 \
 \
\
                                      Section 12 - Key Terms: Developmental \
\
         SECTION 8: DEVELOPMENTAL \
\
cross-sectional versus longitudinal versus cross sequential \
\
nature versus nurture: genes, maturation, environment \
\
continuity versus stage theories of development, quantity versus quality \
\
genotype versus phenotype; X-linked disorders \
\
Down syndrome versus PKU \
\
reflexes: Moro, Babinski, rooting, grasp, sucking \
\
Vygotsky and scaffolding \
\
primary versus secondary aging \
\
holophrasic versus telegraphic speech \
\
Chomsky, Whorf \
\
code switching \
\
effects of Head Start \
\
assimilation versus accommodation \
\
decalage \
\
Piaget: sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and formal operational \
\
metacognition \
\
IQ concordance rates: identical twins (.75); siblings reared together (.5); siblings reared \
apart (.25); one parent and a child (.40 - . 45). \
\
\
\
                                      Section 12 - Key Terms: Developmental \
\
crystallized versus fluid intelligence and aging \
\
Mahler: separation-individuation \
\
separation anxiety versus stranger anxiety \
\
Bowlby: protest, despair, detachment \
\
imprinting \
\
strange situation: securely attached, avoidant, ambivalent, disorganized \
\
authoritarian versus permissive versus authoritative parenting \
\
gender role versus gender identity versus gender constancy \
\
Kubler-Ross \
\
health belief model \
\
easy versus difficult versus slow-to-warm-up \
\
Kohlberg: preconventional versus conventional versus postconventional \
\
Gilligan \
\
Piaget and moral development \
\
teratogens & fetal alcohol syndrome \
\
sex and aging \
\
most common DSM diagnosis in the elderly \
\
abortion effects \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/19 \
 \
\
                                         Section 12 - Key Terms: DSM-5 \
\
                 SECTION 9: DSM-5 \
\
hallmark of intellectual disability, severity, sex ratio \
\
hallmark of a specific learning disorder \
\
hallmark of autism spectrum disorder (including sex ratio) \
\
ADHD versus conduct disorder versus oppositional defiant \
\
schizophrenia versus schizophreniform versus brief psychotic disorder \
\
best prognosis for schizophrenia \
\
concordance rates for schizophrenia: identical twins (50%); child when both parents have \
it (45%); siblings/fraternal twins (10 - 15%); parent to child (5 - 10%) \
\
delusional disorder: erotomanic, grandiose, jealous, persecutory, somatic, mixed. \
unspecified \
\
schizoaffective versus bipolar or depressive disorders with psychotic features \
\
bipolar I versus bipolar II disorder \
\
concordance rates for bipolar: identical twins (80%); fraternal twins and siblings (20 - 25%) \
\
suicide risk factors; homicide risk \
\
separation anxiety disorder \
\
reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement disorder \
\
evidence based treatments for anxiety disorders (specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, \
panic disorder, agoraphobia, generalized anxiety disorder), obsessive-compulsive disorder, \
and PTSD \
\
\
\
                                         Section 12 - Key Terms: DSM-5 \
\
conversion disorder versus somatic symptom disorder versus illness anxiety disorder \
\
factitious disorder versus malingering \
\
transvestitism versus transexualism \
\
hallmark of substance use disorders \
\
alcohol and sedative/hypnotic/anxiolytic intoxication and withdrawal \
\
caffeine intoxication \
\
cocaine and amphetamine intoxication and withdrawal \
\
opioid withdrawal \
\
paranoid personality disorder versus delusional disorder, paranoid type \
\
OCD versus obsessive-compulsive personality disorder \
\
avoidant versus schizoid versus schizotypal versus schizophrenia \
\
\
 \
\
                                         Section 12-Key Terms: Memory \
\
              SECTION 10: MEMORY \
\
sensory memory versus STM versus LTM \
\
rehearsal versus chunking \
\
iconic versus echoic \
\
recent versus remote memory \
\
Zeigarnik effect versus redintegration \
\
semantic versus episodic memory \
\
procedural versus declarative memory \
\
long-term potentiation \
\
retroactive versus proactive inhibition \
\
method of loci, pegword system, word association, and substitute word system \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/22 \
\
                                       Section 12 - Key Terms: Assessment \
\
           SECTION 11: ASSESSMENT \
\
norm versus criterion-referenced score \
\
objective versus subjective tests \
\
normative versus ipsative score \
\
empirical criterion keying \
\
"g factor" \
\
Spearman versus Thurstone versus Cattell versus Gardner versus Sternberg versus Cattell- \
Horn-Carroll \
\
WAIS-IV factors: Verbal Comprehension, Perceptual Reasoning, Working Memory. \
Processing Speed \
\
WISC-V factors: Verbal Comprehension, Visual-Spatial, Fluid Reasoning, Working \
Memory, Processing Speed \
\
WAIS-IV or WISC-V interpretations \
\
L, F, and K on MMPI \
\
PSYCHPREP       Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/23 \
 \
\
                                        Section 12 - Key Terms: Assessment \
\
            SECTION 11: ASSESSMENT \
\
 norm versus criterion-referenced score \
\
 objective versus subjective tests \
\
 normative versus ipsative score \
\
 empirical criterion keying \
\
 "g factor" \
\
 Spearman versus Thurstone versus Cattell versus Gardner versus Sternberg versus Cattell- \
 Horn-Carroll \
\
WAIS-IV factors: Verbal Comprehension, Perceptual Reasoning, Working Memory. \
Processing Speed \
\
WISC-V factors: Verbal Comprehension, Visual-Spatial, Fluid Reasoning, Working \
Memory, Processing Speed \
\
 WAIS-IV or WISC-V interpretations \
\
L, F, and K on MMPI \
\
PSYCHPREP        Copyright 2019 @ Sharon Jablon, Ph.D. Section 12/ Key Terms/23 \
 \cb1 \
\
}