# Research – Single-Subject and Group Designs


**Types of Research:** The various approaches to research are categorized as qualitative or quantitative.

1. **Qualitative Research – Approaches:** Qualitative research is used to study the kind and quality of behavior and produces information that’s interpreted and usually summarized in a narrative description. The approaches to qualitative research include the following:

(a) *Grounded Theory:* The primary goal of research based on grounded theory is “to derive a general, abstract theory of a process, action, or interaction grounded in the views of the participants in a study” (Creswell, 2003, p. 14). The primary data collection methods are interviews and observations. 

(b) *Phenomenology:* The purpose of research using a phenomenological approach is to gain an in-depth understanding of the “lived experience” of participants – i.e., “how they perceive it, describe it, feel about it, judge it, remember it, make sense of it, and talk about it with others” (Patton, 2002, p. 104). In-depth interviews are the primary source of information.

(c) *Ethnography:* Ethnography involves “studying participants in their natural culture or setting … [while they’re engaged] in their naturally occurring activities” (Gay & Airasian, 2003, p. 16).  The primary data collection method is participant observation, which involves joining a culture and participating in its activities.

(d) *Thematic Analysis:* Thematic analysis “is a method for identifying, analysing, and reporting patterns (themes) within the data” (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p. 79). It is a “stand-alone” method but also sometimes serves at the starting point for other methods. The primary sources of information are in-depth interviews and focus groups.

2. **Qualitative Research – Triangulation:** Triangulation “is the research practice of comparing and combining different sources of evidence in order to reach a better understanding of the research topic” (Roberts-Holmes, 2005, p. 40). It is most associated with qualitative research as a method for increasing the credibility of a study’s data and results, but it is also used in quantitative research and mixed methods research which combines qualitative and quantitative methods. Denzin (1978) distinguished between four types of triangulation: *Methodological triangulation* is the most commonly used type and involves using multiple methods to obtain data (e.g., interviews, focus groups, observations, questionnaires, documents). *Data triangulation* involves using the same method to obtain data at different times, in different settings, or from different people. *Investigator triangulation* involves using two or more investigators to collect and analyze data. *Theory triangulation* involves interpreting data using multiple theories, hypotheses, or  perspectives.

3. **Quantitative Research:** Quantitative research is used to identify and study differences in the amount of behavior and produces data that’s “expressed numerically and can be analyzed in a variety of ways” (Drummond & Murphy-Reyes, 2016, p. 10). The types of quantitative research can be categorized as descriptive, correlational, or experimental. 

(a) *Descriptive research* is conducted to “describe a variable or set of variables as they exist naturally” (Gravetter & Forzano, 2016, p. 371). Surveys, case studies, and observational studies are types of descriptive research. Surveys involve using self- or interviewer-administered questionnaires to collect qualitative and/or quantitative data from multiple individuals. Case studies involve collecting in-depth information about a particular individual, group, or situation using interviews, observation, document analysis, and/or other methods. Observational studies involve observing and recording information about behaviors or events as they naturally occur. Observations of behaviors can be unstructured or structured: Unstructured observations involve recording information about behaviors when they occur and then preparing a detailed description of the behaviors, often in written narrative form. In contrast, structured observations involve using a predefined plan or system for recording information about behaviors. Interval recording and event recording are structured observation techniques: *Interval recording* is also known as interval sampling and time sampling and involves recording whether or not the behavior of interest occurred during specific time intervals (e.g., during 30 2-minute intervals for a 1-hour observation period). *Event recording* is also referred to as event sampling and involves recording the number of times the behavior occurs during the entire observation period and the times at which it began and ended. Interval recording is most useful for behaviors that occur frequently and do not have a clear beginning and end (e.g., listens to the teacher, plays with peers), while event recording is most useful for behaviors that occur infrequently and have a clear beginning and end (leaves seat, raises hand).

(b) *Correlational research* involves correlating the scores or status of a sample of individuals on two or more variables to determine the magnitude and direction of the relationship between the variables. Variables are usually measured as they exist, without any attempt to modify or control them or determine if there’s a causal relationship between them. The data collected in a correlational research study are often used to conduct a regression analysis or multiple regression analysis to derive a regression or multiple regression equation. The equation is then used to predict a person’s score on a criterion from his/her obtained score(s) on the predictor(s). (In the context of correlational research, an independent variable is often referred to as the predictor or X variable and the dependent variable is referred to as the criterion or Y variable.)

(c) *Experimental research* is conducted to determine if there is a causal relationship between independent and dependent variables and is divided into two types: true experimental and quasi-experimental. The difference between them is the amount of control researchers have over certain aspects of the research study, which affects how confident researchers can be that there is a causal relationship between a study's independent and dependent variables. Of the two types, true experimental research provides greater control. Most important, when conducting a true experimental study, researchers can randomly assign subjects to different groups (to different levels of the independent variable), which helps ensure that subjects in different groups are similar at the beginning of the study in terms of characteristics that might affect their status on the dependent variable. As a result, researchers can be confident, to some degree, that a statistically significant relationship between independent and dependent variables was caused by the effects of the independent variable on the dependent variable. In contrast, when conducting a quasi-experimental study, researchers cannot randomly assign subjects to different groups because they must use pre-existing groups for the different levels of the independent variable or because their study includes only a single group. As a result, researchers cannot be confident that a statistically significant relationship between independent and dependent variables is causal.

**Experimental Research – Single-Subject Designs:**  The various single-subject designs share the following characteristics: (a) They include at least two phases: a baseline (no treatment) phase, which is designated with the letter “A,” and a treatment phase, which is designated with the letter “B.” (b) The treatment phase does not usually begin until a stable pattern of performance on the dependent variable is established during the baseline phase. (c) The dependent variable is measured multiple times during each phase, which helps a researcher determine if a change in the dependent variable is due to the independent variable or to maturation, history, or other factor. Although single-subject designs are ordinarily used with a single subject, the multiple-baseline design across subjects design includes two or more subjects and the other single-subject designs can be used with multiple subjects when the subjects are treated as a single group.

1. **AB Design:** The AB design consists of a single baseline (A) phase and a single treatment (B) phase. Like all single-subject designs, it helps a researcher determine if an observed change in the dependent variable is due to the independent variable or to maturation since maturational effects (e.g., fatigue, boredom) usually occur gradually over time. Consequently, changes in performance on the dependent variable due to maturation would be apparent in the pattern of the individual’s performance. The AB design does not control history, however, because any change in the dependent variable that occurs when the independent variable is applied could be due to the independent variable or to an unintended event that occurred at the same time the independent variable was applied.   

2. **Reversal Designs:** A single-subject design is referred to as a reversal or withdrawal design when at least one additional baseline phase is added. The ABA and ABAB designs are reversal designs. The *ABAB design* begins with a baseline phase which is followed by a treatment phase, withdrawal of the treatment during a second baseline phase, and then application of the same treatment during the second treatment phase. The advantage of adding phases is that doing so helps a researcher determine if a change in the dependent variable is due to history rather than the independent variable: When the dependent variable returns to its initial baseline level during the second baseline phase and to its initial treatment level during the second treatment phase, it’s unlikely that changes in the dependent variable were due to unintended events.

3. **Multiple Baseline Design:** When using the multiple baseline design, the independent variable is sequentially applied across different “baselines,” which can be different behaviors, tasks, settings, or subjects. For example, a psychologist might use a multiple-baseline across behaviors design to evaluate the effectiveness of response cost for reducing a child’s undesirable interactions with other children during recess – i.e., name calling, hitting, and making obscene gestures. To do so, the psychologist would obtain baseline data on the number of times the child engages in each behavior during morning recess for five school days. He would then apply response cost to name calling during recess for the next five school days while continuing to obtain baseline data for hitting and making obscene gestures. Next, the psychologist would apply response cost to name calling and hitting for the next five school days while continuing to obtain baseline data for making obscene gestures. And, finally, he would apply response cost to name calling, hitting, and making obscene gestures during recess for the next five school days. If the results of the study indicate that each undesirable behavior remained stable during its baseline phase and decreased only when response cost was applied to it, this would demonstrate the effectiveness of response cost for all three behaviors. An advantage of the multiple baseline design over the reversal designs is that, once the independent variable is applied to a behavior, task, setting, or participant, it does not have to be withdrawn during the course of the study.

**Experimental Research – Group Designs:**  Group designs can be categorized as between-subjects, within-subjects, and mixed designs.  

. **Between-Subjects Designs:** A study using a between-subjects design includes two or more groups of subjects, with each group being exposed to a different level of the independent variable. For example, in a study comparing the effectiveness of low, moderate, and high doses of an antidepressant for reducing depressive symptoms, one group of subjects would receive the low dose, a second group would receive the moderate dose, and a third group would receive the high dose.
*Randomized controlled trials* (RCTs) are also known as randomized clinical trials. They are true experimental studies that use a between-subjects design to evaluate a new treatment and are considered the gold standard of clinical research (e.g., Nestor & Schutt, 2019). RCTs are conducted in controlled conditions and involve randomly assigning subjects to one of two or more groups: RCTs often include the treatment group and a control group that is either a standard-of-care group or a no-treatment or placebo group. Alternatively, an RCT can include more than two groups – for example, the treatment group, a standard-of-care group, and a no-treatment or placebo group. The primary advantage of RCTs is that random assignment of subjects to groups helps ensure that groups are equivalent at the beginning of the study, which increases confidence that a statistically significant relationship between the treatment and outcomes is a causal relationship (i.e., random assignment increases the study's internal validity). A disadvantage is that the strict inclusion and exclusion criteria for subjects and the controlled conditions of the study reduce the ability to generalize the study's results to other individuals and conditions (i.e., they limit the study's external validity).

2. **Within-Subjects Designs:** When using a within-subjects design, each participant is exposed to some or all levels of the independent variable, with each level being administered at a different time. When using a single-group within-subjects design to evaluate the effects of an antidepressant drug dose on depression, the low, moderate, and high doses would be compared by sequentially administering the three doses to all subjects and evaluating their depressive symptoms after they’ve taken each dose for a prespecified period of time. The *time-series design* is a type of within-subjects design that’s essentially a group version of the single-subject AB design and involves measuring the dependent variable at regular intervals multiple times before and after the independent variable is administered so that all participants act as both the control (no treatment) and treatment groups.

3. **Mixed Designs**: When using a mixed design, a study includes at least two independent variables, with at least one variable being a between-subjects variable and another being a within-subjects variable. A mixed design is being used when the effects of drug dose on depressive symptoms are measured weekly for six weeks after participants begin taking either the low, moderate, or high dose of the antidepressant. In this situation, drug dose is a between-subjects variable because each subject will receive only one dosage level and time of measurement is a within-subjects variable because each subject’s depressive symptoms will be measured at regular intervals over time. 

**Factorial Designs:** A research design is referred to as a factorial design whenever it includes two or more independent variables. An advantage of a factorial design is that it allows a researcher to obtain information on the main effects of each independent variable as well as the interaction between the variables. A *main effect* is the effect of one independent variable on the dependent variable, while an *interaction effect* is the combined effect of two or more independent variables on the dependent variable. Note that any combination of significant main and interaction effects is possible: There can be main effects of one or more independent variables and interaction effects, main effects of one or more independent variables and no interaction effects, or no main effects but significant interaction effects. In addition, when there’s a significant interaction, any main effects must be interpreted with caution because the interaction may modify the meaning of the main effects. 

As an example, a research study evaluating the effects of type of therapy (cognitive-behavioral therapy, interpersonal therapy, and supportive therapy) and antidepressant drug dose (high, moderate, and low) on depressive symptoms has two independent variables (type of therapy and drug dose) and subjects will be assigned to one of nine groups that each represent a different combination of the levels of the two variables – cognitive therapy and low dose, interpersonal therapy and low dose, supportive therapy and low dose, cognitive therapy and moderate dose, etc. The results of the statistical analysis of the data obtained in this study will indicate if there are significant main and/or interaction effects. For example, the results might indicate that, overall, cognitive therapy is significantly more effective than interpersonal therapy and supportive therapy and the high dose is significantly more effective than the moderate or low dose of the antidepressant drug. In other words, there are main effects for both type of therapy and drug dose. The results of the study might also indicate that the moderate dose is most effective for people who received cognitive therapy but that the high dose is most effective for people who received interpersonal therapy or supportive therapy. In other words, there’s an interaction between type of therapy and drug dose: The effects of drug dose differ for different types of therapy.

**Analogue Research:** Analogue research involves conducting studies in situations that approximate, rather than replicate, real-life situations. Studies that use college students rather than individuals in same age range from the general population as research subjects or involve conducting a study in a laboratory or other controlled setting rather than in a naturalistic setting are examples of analogue research. Analogue research is particularly useful when conducting research in real-life situations is impractical or unethical. The primary advantage of analogue research is that it can maximize internal validity better than research in naturalistic conditions can because it gives researchers greater control over factors that could affect the results of their studies. A disadvantage is that it limits the external validity (generalizability) of research results.

**Developmental Research:** Developmental research is conducted to study changes that occur over time in one or more variables. Included in this category are longitudinal, cross-sectional, and cross-sequential research.

(a) *Longitudinal research* involves repeated assessment of the variable(s) of interest for the same group(s) of individuals for an extended period of time. A researcher is conducting a longitudinal study on the effects of increasing age in mid- and late adulthood on cognitive functioning when the study involves comparing the scores obtained by the same group of individuals on a cognitive functioning test when they are 40, 50, 60, 70, and 80 years old. Disadvantages of longitudinal studies are that they are time-consuming and expensive to conduct. In addition, their results may be confounded by an attrition bias if there is a high drop-out rate of subjects over the course of the study and subjects who drop-out differ in important ways from those who remain in the study.  

(b) *Cross-sectional research* involves assessment of the variable(s) of interest individuals of different ages at one point in time. A researcher is conducting a cross-sectional study on the effects of increasing age in mid- and late adulthood on cognitive functioning when the study involves comparing scores obtained on a cognitive functioning test administered at about the same time by subjects who are either 40, 50, 60, 70, or 80 years old. Advantages of cross-sectional studies are they are less time-consuming and expensive than longitudinal studies are. A major disadvantage is that their results can be confounded by cohort effects which occur when the different groups of subjects differ in terms of characteristics that affect their status on the variable(s) of interest. For example, in the cognitive functioning study, differences between age groups could be due, at least to some degree, to factors other than increasing age such as age-related differences in educational experiences, economic conditions, and historical and cultural factors.

(c) *Cross-sequential research* combines longitudinal and cross-sectional designs. A researcher is conducting a cross-sequential study on the effects of increasing age in mid- and late adulthood on cognitive functioning when the study involves comparing the scores obtained on a cognitive functioning test by subjects who are either 40, 50, or 60 years old and by the same subjects when they are 10 and 20 years older. An advantage of cross-sequential studies is that they provide information needed to help distinguish the effects of increasing age from cohort effects. However, while cross-sequential studies are less time-consuming and expensive than longitudinal studies, they are more time-consuming and expensive than cross-sectional studies. In addition, their results can be confounded by attrition bias.

**Sampling Methods for Group Designs:** It is ordinarily not possible to collect data from all members of the target population when conducting a research study and, consequently, a sample of individuals is selected from the population. Methods for selecting a sample are categorized as probability and non-probability sampling methods.

**1. Probability Sampling:** Probability sampling requires the random selection of the sample from the population, which helps ensure that members of the sample are representative of the population. However, even when a sample is randomly selected, the sample may be affected by sampling error, which means that the sample is not completely representative of the population from which it was selected due to the effects of chance (random) factors. Sampling error is most likely to be a problem when the sample size is small. 

Methods of probability sampling include the following: (a) When using *simple random sampling*, all members of the population have an equal chance of being selected. Using a computer-generated sample of individuals that was randomly chosen from a list of all individuals in the population is one method of simple random sampling. (b) *Systematic random sampling* can be used when a random list of all individuals in the population is available. It involves selecting every nth (e.g., 10th or 25th) individual from the list until the desired number of individuals has been selected. (c) *Stratified random sampling* is useful when the population is heterogeneous with regard to one or more characteristics that are relevant to the study (e.g., gender, age range, DSM diagnosis), and the researcher wants to make sure that each characteristic is adequately represented in the sample. This involves dividing the population into subgroups (strata) based on the relevant characteristics and selecting a random sample from each subgroup. (d) *Cluster random sampling* is used when it is impossible to randomly select individuals from a population because the population is very large and there are natural clusters in the population (e.g., mid-sized cities, school districts, mental health clinics). It involves randomly selecting a sample of clusters and then either including in the study all individuals in each selected cluster or a random sample of individuals in each selected cluster. 

2. **Non-Probability Sampling:** When using non-probability sampling, individuals are selected on the basis of non-random criteria and all members of the population do not have an equal chance of being selected. Non-probability sampling is vulnerable to sampling error and sampling bias, which is also known as selection bias and systematic error. Sampling bias occurs when participants in the study over- or underrepresent one or more relevant population characteristics because of the way that the sample was obtained. Consequently, non-probability sampling is most useful for qualitative and exploratory studies designed to acquire a better understanding of an under-researched issue or population rather than studies designed to test hypotheses. Methods of non-probability sampling include the following: (a) *Convenience sampling* involves including in a sample individuals who are easily accessible to the researcher (e.g., the students in a psychologist’s clinical psychology classes). (b) When using *voluntary response sampling*, the sample consists of individuals who volunteered to participate in the study. (c) *Purposive sampling* is also known as judgmental sampling. When using this method, researchers use their judgment to select individuals who are appropriate for the purposes of their studies. (d) *Snowball sampling* is used when direct access to members of the target population is difficult. It involves asking initial individuals who participate in the study if they can recommend others who qualify for inclusion in the study.

**Community-Based Participatory Research (CBPR):** CBPR “is a collaborative approach to research that equitably involves all partners in the research process and recognizes the unique strengths that each brings. CBPR begins with a research topic of importance to the community and has the aim of combining knowledge with action and achieving social change to improve health outcomes and eliminate health disparities” (Kellogg Community Health Scholars Program, 2001, p. 2). CBPR is a type of action research, which is research that has the goal of improving a social problem. It does not rely on specific research methods or designs but, instead, can utilize qualitative and/or quantitative methods and an experimental or non-experimental design.  

CBPR involves including community members who are affected by or interested in the target issue in all phases of the research. Community members are considered equal partners with other members of the research team, which may include academic researchers, public-health decision-makers, and healthcare professionals. Child and adolescent community members have been less commonly included as research partners in CBPR than adults have, even when the target of the research is a problem that affects youth. However, a review of the literature by Jacquez, Vaughn, and Wagner (2013) suggests that youth partnerships are increasing, although the extent to which they are involved in the research process varies from project to project. 

Israel and her colleagues (2005) have identified nine core principles of CBPR: (a) Recognize the community as a unit of identity. (b) Build on the community’s strengths and resources. (c) Facilitate an equitable, collaborative, and power-sharing partnership during all phases of the research. (d) Foster co-learning and capacity building among all partners. (e) Integrate and achieve a balance between knowledge generation and intervention for the benefit of all partners. (f) Focus on public health problems of relevance to the community and emphasize an ecological approach that recognizes the multiple determinants of health. (g) View system development as a cyclical and iterative process. (h) Disseminate research results to all partners and involve them in the dissemination process. (i) Understand that CBPR is a long-term process that requires a commitment to sustainability.

