# Research – Internal/External Validity


Internal and external validity are standards that are used to judge the usefulness of the results of experimental research studies. *Internal validity* is the extent to which it is possible to derive an accurate conclusion about the cause-effect relationship between a study’s independent and dependent variables. *External validity* is the extent to which it is possible to generalize that conclusion beyond the conditions of the current study. External validity consists of five subcategories (e.g., Privitera & Ahlgrim-Delzell, 2019): (a) Population validity is the generalizability of a study’s results to other people in the population from which subjects were drawn. (b) Ecological validity is the generalizability of results to other settings or environments, especially to real-world settings (e.g., clinical practice). (c) Temporal validity is the generalizability of results across time. (d) Treatment variation validity is the generalizability of results to variations of the treatment (independent variable). (e) Outcome validity is the generalizability of results to different but related dependent variables.

**Threats to Internal Validity:** The major threats to a study’s internal validity include the following:  

1. **History:** History refers to events that occur during the course of a study and are not part of the study but affect its results. The best way to control history when it’s due to events that occur outside the context of the study is to include more than one group and randomly assign participants to the different groups. When this is done, participants in all groups should be affected to the same extent by history. History can also be a threat when participants are exposed to the independent variable in groups and one group experiences an unintended event (e.g., a power outage or other disturbance) that’s not experienced by other groups and that affects the results of the study. This type of history is more difficult to control and must be considered when interpreting the results of a study.  

2. **Maturation:** Maturation refers to physical, cognitive, and emotional changes that occur within subjects during the course of the study that are due to the passage of time and affect the study’s results. The longer the duration of the study, the more likely its results will be threatened by maturation. The best way to control maturation is to include more than one group in the study and randomly assign participants to the different groups. When this is done, participants in all groups should experience similar maturational effects and any differences between the groups at the end of the study will not be due to maturation.

3. **Differential Selection**: Differential selection is a misnomer because it actually refers to differential assignment of subjects to treatment groups. It occurs when groups differ at the beginning of the study due to the way they were assigned to groups and this difference affects the study’s results. The best way to control differential selection is to randomly assign participants to groups so the groups are similar at the start of the study.

4. **Statistical Regression:** Statistical regression is also known as regression to the mean and threatens a study’s internal validity when participants are selected for inclusion in the study because of their extreme scores on a pretest. It occurs because many characteristics are not entirely stable over time and many measuring instruments are not perfectly reliable. Statistical regression is controlled by not including only extreme scorers in the study or by having more than one group and ensuring that the groups are equivalent in terms of extreme scorers at the beginning of the study.

5. **Testing:** Testing threatens a study’s internal validity when taking a pretest affects how participants respond to the posttest. This threat is controlled by not administering a pretest or by using the Solomon four-group design, which is described below.

6. **Instrumentation:** Instrumentation is a threat to internal validity when the instrument used to measure the dependent variable changes over time. For example, raters may become more accurate at rating participants over the course of the study. The only way to control instrumentation is to ensure that instruments don’t change over time. If that’s not possible, its potential effects must be considered when interpreting the study’s results.

7. **Differential Attrition:** Differential attrition threatens internal validity when participants drop out of one group for different reasons than participants in other groups do and, as a result, the composition of the group is altered in a way that affects the results of the study. Attrition is difficult to control because researchers often don’t have the information needed to determine how participants who drop out from a study differ from those who remain.

**Threats to External Validity:** The major threats to a study’s external validity include the following:

1. **Reactivity:** Reactivity threatens a study’s external validity whenever participants respond differently to the independent variable during a study than they would normally respond. Factors that contribute to reactivity include demand characteristics and experimenter expectancy. *Demand characteristics* are cues that inform participants of what behavior is expected of them. *Experimenter expectancy* occurs when the experimenter acts in ways that bias the results of the study and can involve (a) actions that take the form of demand characteristics and directly affect participants (e.g., saying “good” whenever a participant gives the expected or desired response) or (b) actions that don’t directly affect participants (e.g., recording the responses of participants inaccurately in a way that supports the purpose of the study). The best ways to control reactivity are to use unobtrusive measures, deception, or the single- or double-blind technique. When using the single-blind technique, participants do not know which group they’re participating in (e.g., if they’re in the treatment or control group); when using the double-blind technique, participants and researchers do not know what group participants are in. 

2. **Multiple Treatment Interference:** Multiple treatment interference is also referred to as carryover effects and order effects. It may occur whenever a within-subjects research design is used – i.e., when each participant receives more than one level of the independent variable. For example, if a low dose, moderate dose, and high dose of a drug are sequentially administered to a group of participants and the high dose is most effective, its superior effect may be due to the fact that it was administered after the low and moderate doses. Multiple treatment interference is controlled by using *counterbalancing*, which involves having different groups of participants receive the different levels of the independent variable in a different order. The Latin square design is a type of counterbalanced design in which each level of the independent variable occurs equally often in each ordinal position.

3. **Selection-Treatment Interaction:** A selection-treatment interaction is a threat to external validity when research participants differ from individuals in the population, and the difference affects how participants respond to the independent variable. For example, people who volunteer for research studies may be more motivated and, therefore, more responsive to the independent variable than non-volunteers would be. The best way to control this threat is to randomly select subjects from the population.

4. **Pretest-Treatment Interaction.** A pretest-treatment interaction is also known as pretest sensitization and threatens a study’s external validity when taking a pretest affects how participants respond to the independent variable. For example, answering questions about a controversial issue in a pretest may make subjects pay more attention to information about that issue when it’s addressed in a lecture or discussion during the study. The *Solomon four-group design* is used to identify the effects of pretesting on a study’s internal and external validity. When using this design, the study includes four groups that allow the researcher to evaluate (a) the effects of pretesting on the independent variable by comparing two groups that are both exposed to the independent variable, with only one group taking the pretest and (b) the effects of pretesting on the dependent variable by comparing two groups that are not exposed to the independent variable, with one group taking the pre- and posttests and the other taking the posttest only.   

