# Types of Variables and Data


**Types of Variables:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with independent, dependent, extraneous, mediator, and moderator variables. 

1. **Independent and Dependent Variables:** An *independent variable* is the variable that a researcher believes has an effect on the dependent variable and on which research participants differ, either because they’re exposed to different levels of the independent variable during the study or because they begin the study with different levels. Assigning participants with major depressive disorder to either cognitive-behavior therapy or interpersonal therapy is an example of the former; comparing participants who begin the study with high, average, or low levels of self-esteem is an example of the latter. The independent variable always has at least two levels – e.g., treatment versus no treatment, treatment #1 versus treatment #2. The *dependent variable* is the variable that’s expected to be affected by the independent variable, and it’s data on the dependent variable that’s analyzed with an inferential statistical test.

If you’re having trouble distinguishing between a study’s independent and dependent variables for a study described in an exam question, converting the description of the study to the following question might be helpful: “What are the effects of the [independent variable(s)] on the [dependent variable(s)]?” For a study comparing the effects of cognitive-behavior therapy, interpersonal therapy, and acceptance and commitment therapy for reducing the severity of depressive symptoms, the question is, “What are the effects of type of therapy on the severity of depressive symptoms?” Type of therapy is the independent variable and it has three levels (cognitive-behavior therapy, interpersonal therapy, and acceptance and commitment therapy), and severity of depressive symptoms is the dependent variable.

2. **Moderator and Mediator Variables:** A *moderator variabl*e affects the direction and/or strength of the relationship between independent and dependent variables. If a study finds that cognitive-behavior therapy is more effective for treating adolescents with social anxiety disorder when the adolescents have authoritative parents than when they have authoritarian parents, parenting style is a moderator variable. In contrast, a *mediator variable* explains the relationship between independent and dependent variables. For instance, cognitive therapies are based on the assumption that therapy reduces anxiety because it alters client’s dysfunctional thinking. In other words, therapy (the independent variable) leads to more realistic thinking (mediator variable) which, in turn, leads to reduced anxiety (dependent variable). 

3. **Extraneous Variables:** Extraneous variables are not an intentional part of a research study but affect the relationship between the study’s independent and dependent variables and make it difficult to determine if an apparent effect of an independent variable on a dependent variable is actually due to the independent variable. In a study designed to compare two different teaching methods on memorization, if participants in one group unintentionally receive instruction in noisier conditions than participants in the other group do, noise is likely to be an extraneous variable. Note that the terms extraneous variable, confounding variable, and disturbance variable are often used interchangeably. Some authors, however, describe a confounding variable as a specific type of extraneous variable that’s related to the independent variable and a disturbance variable as another type of extraneous variable that’s related to the dependent variable (e.g., Jaccard & Becker, 2009).   

**Scales of Measurement:** Variables can be measured using a nominal, ordinal, interval, or ratio scale.

1. **Nominal Scale:** Variables measured on a nominal scale divide people into unordered categories. Gender, eye color, and DSM diagnosis are nominal variables. Numbers can be assigned to the categories, but they’re just labels and do not provide any quantitative information. When a nominal variable has only two categories, it’s also known as a dichotomous variable.

2. **Ordinal Scale:** Variables measured on an ordinal scale divide people into categories that are ordered in terms of magnitude. When a variable is measured on an ordinal scale, you can conclude that one person has more or less of the characteristic being measured but you cannot determine how much more or less. Likert scale scores (e.g., strongly agree, agree, disagree, and strongly disagree) and ranks (1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.) are ordinal scores.

3. **Interval Scale:** Variables measured on an interval scale assign people to ordered categories, with the difference between adjacent categories being equal. Scores on standardized tests often represent an interval scale. For example, IQ scores are interval scores, and the one point difference between IQ scores of 100 and 101 is considered to be the same as the one point difference between IQ scores of 101 and 102. Note, however, that interval scales do not have an absolute zero point: Even if it were possible for an examinee to obtain a score of 0 on an IQ test, this would not mean the examinee has no intelligence.

4. **Ratio Scale:** Variables measured on a ratio scale assign people to ordered categories, with the difference between adjacent categories being equal and the scale having an absolute zero point. Weight measured in pounds and yearly income measured in dollars represent a ratio scale. Because of the absolute zero point, it’s possible to draw certain conclusions about ratio data that can’t be drawn about interval data. For example, it’s not possible to conclude that a person who has an IQ of 200 is twice as intelligent as a person who has an IQ of 100 because IQ scores represent an interval scale, but it is possible to conclude that a person who weighs 200 pounds is twice as heavy as a person who weighs 100 pounds because weight in pounds is a ratio scale.  

**Graphs:** Graphs can be used to visually depict data collected in a research study, with the scale of measurement of the data determining which graph is appropriate. *Bar graphs* are used with nominal and ordinal data. The nominal or ordinal categories [e.g., blue, green, brown, and hazel eyes; course grades of A, B, C, D, and F) are listed on the horizontal (x) axis and the numbers or percentages of observations are listed from low to high on the vertical (y) axis. A bar is placed above each category, with its height indicating the number or percentage of observations. In a bar graph, bars are separated from each other by a space. *Histograms* are used with interval and ratio data. Scores are listed in order on the x-axis, and the numbers or percentages of observations are listed on the y-axis. When there is a large distribution of scores, the ¬scores are usually collapsed into score intervals. For example, when scores range from 0 to 100, the intervals might be 0-25, 26-50, 51-75, 76-100. A bar is placed above each score or score interval, with its height indicating the number or percentage of scores. The bars in a histogram are not separated by a space. *Frequency polygons* are also known as line graphs and are also used with interval and ratio data. When using a frequency polygon, dots are placed above each score or score interval, with the location of each dot indicating the number or percentage of observations. Dots are then connected with a line. (Note: There is disagreement about the use of bar graphs versus histograms for ordinal data. Some authors recommend bar graphs for ordinal data, while others recommend histograms.) 

**Frequency Polygon Shapes:** Frequency polygons can be described in terms of their shape as normal or non-normal.
1. **Normal Distribution:** A normal distribution is symmetrical and bell-shaped and has certain characteristics. First, in a normal distribution, the three measures of central tendency – the mean, median, and mode – are equal to the same value. Second, 68% of scores fall between the scores that are plus and minus one standard deviation from the mean, about 95% of scores fall between the scores that are plus and minus two standard deviations from the mean, and about 99% of scores fall between the scores that are plus and minus three standard deviations from the mean. For example, if a distribution of scores on a job knowledge test for a sample of employees has a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 10, 68% of employees obtained scores between 90 and 110, about 95% obtained scores between 80 and 120, and about 99% obtained scores between 70 and 130.
2. **Positively and Negatively Skewed Distributions:** Skewed distributions are one type of non-normal distribution. These distributions are asymmetrical, with most scores “piled up” in one side of the distribution and a few scores in the extended tail on the other side: In a negatively skewed distribution, the few scores are in the negative tail (the low side of the distribution); in a positively skewed distribution, the few scores are in the positive tail (the high side of the distribution) – i.e., the “tail containing the few scores tells the tale.” In skewed distributions, the mean, median, and mode do not equal the same value: Instead, the mean is in the extended tail with the few scores, the median is in the middle, and the mode is in the side of the distribution that contains most of the scores. Consequently, in a *negatively skewed distribution*, the mean has the lowest value, the median is the middle value, and the mode has the highest value. Conversely, in a *positively skewed distribution*, the mean has the highest value, the median is the middle value, and the mode has the lowest value. When a distribution is skewed, the median is often the preferred measure of central tendency because, unlike the mean, it’s not distorted by the atypical scores in the distribution (Griggs, 2009).
3. **Leptokurtic and Platykurtic Distributions:** Leptokurtic and platykurtic distributions are another type of non-normal distribution. A *leptokurtic distribution* has a sharper peak and flatter tails than a normal distribution (i.e., most scores are “piled up” in the middle of the distribution). In contrast, a *platykurtic distribution* is flatter in the middle and has thicker tails than a normal distribution (i.e., scores are more evenly distributed throughout the distribution).  
 
