{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2818
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12720\viewh7800\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Brief Therapies\
\
\
Interpersonal psychotherapy, solution-focused therapy, therapy based on the transtheoretical model, and motivational interviewing are brief therapies that are often asked about on the EPPP.\
\
1.\'a0**Interpersonal Psychotherapy:**\'a0Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) focuses on the interpersonal factors that contribute to a client\'92s current symptoms. It\'92s based on the medical model and views depression and other mental disorders as treatable medical illnesses, and its primary goals are symptom relief and improved interpersonal functioning. Although IPT was originally developed by Klerman and Weissman (Klerman, Weissman, Rounsaville, & Chevron, 1984) as a treatment for acute depression, it has been modified to treat bipolar disorder, eating disorders, and several other disorders. Therapy involves three stages: (a) During the\'a0*initial stage*, the therapist determines the client\'92s diagnosis and the interpersonal context of the client\'92s symptoms. This information is then used to identify the primary problem area that will be the focus of treatment. For depression, the problem areas are interpersonal role disputes, interpersonal role transitions, interpersonal deficits, and grief. During this stage, clients are assigned the \'93sick role\'94 in order to allow them to be ill without blaming themselves for their\'a0symptoms and to view their illnesses as temporary and treatable. (b) During the\'a0*middle phase*, the therapist uses a variety of strategies to address the problem area identified in the initial stage. Commonly used strategies include encouragement of affect, role-playing, communication analysis, and decision analysis. (c) During the\'a0*final stage*, the therapist addresses issues related to termination and relapse prevention.\
\
2.\'a0**Solution-Focused Therapy:**\'a0Solution focused therapy (de Shazer, 1991) focuses on solutions to problems instead of the etiology and nature of problems. Solution-focused therapists adopt a goal-directed collaborative approach and use several types of questions to help clients identify treatment goals and personal strengths and resources that will help them achieve those goals: (a) The\'a0*miracle question*\'a0is used to help establish the focus of treatment as the future (rather than the past or present) and identify treatment goals. Example: If a miracle happened during the night and your problem was solved, how would you know that a miracle occurred? (b)\'a0*Exception questions*\'a0are used to help clients identify times when their problems did not exist or were less intense. Example: Can you think of a time in the past two weeks when you and your partner did not argue? (c)\'a0*Scaling questions*\'a0help clients evaluate their current status or their progress toward achieving their goals. Example: On a scale from 1 to 10, with 1 being totally relaxed and 10 being the most stressed you\'92ve ever been, how stressed are you now?\
Each therapy session is structured and involves asking questions, providing feedback, and assigning a task to complete before the next session. For example, the formula first session task is assigned at the end of the first session and requires clients to identify something in their lives that they want to continue.\
\
3.\'a0**Transtheoretical Model:**\'a0The transtheoretical model (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1983) integrates concepts and strategies from multiple therapeutic approaches and is based on the assumption that strategies are most effective when they match the person\'92s stage of change. It distinguishes between six stages of change, and the primary goal of the first five stages is to help the client advance to the next stage:\
\
(a)\'a0*Precontemplation:*\'a0Clients in the precontemplation stage have no intention of taking action to change their behaviors in the next six months. They may be in denial about their problems or may have made multiple unsuccessful attempts to change and believe that change is impossible. These individuals are likely to resist advice or change interventions but may benefit from consciousness raising, dramatic relief (experiencing and expressing emotions), and environmental reevaluation (examining how the environment affects their behavior).\
\
(b)\'a0*Contemplation:*\'a0Clients in this stage plan to change in the next six months but they\'92re ambivalent about changing, which may make it difficult for them to transition to the next stage. These individuals benefit from self-reevaluation (evaluating how they feel about the situation) in addition to the strategies that are useful for individuals in the precontemplation stage.\
\
(c)\'a0*Preparation:*\'a0Clients in the preparation stage plan to take action within the next month. Useful strategies for these individuals support their decision to change and include self-reevaluation and self-liberation (believing that change is possible and making a commitment to change).\'a0\
\
(d)\'a0*Action:*\'a0Clients in the action stage are taking action to change their behaviors. Effective strategies for these individuals include contingency management, stimulus control, and counterconditioning.\
\
(e)\'a0*Maintenance*: Clients transition to the maintenance stage when they have maintained the desired behavior change for six months. The primary focus of treatment for individuals in this stage is relapse prevention which involves the same strategies useful for individuals in the action stage.\
\
(f)\'a0*Termination:*\'a0Clients in this stage are confident that their risk for relapse is low.\
\
According to this model, motivation to change is affected by three factors \'96 decisional balance, self-efficacy, and temptation. Decisional balance is the strength of the person\'92s beliefs about the pros and cons of changing and is most important as a determinant of motivation during the contemplation stage. Self-efficacy refers to the confidence the person has about his/her ability to change and avoid relapse. It\'92s an important determinant of whether a person transitions from the contemplation to the preparation stage and then from the preparation to the action stage. Temptation is the intensity of the urge to engage in the undesirable behavior and is usually strongest during the first few stages of change.\'a0\
Finally, note that the order of the stages is fairly easy to memorize because the name of each stage describes the stage and its order in the sequence (e.g., the precontemplation stage occurs before the contemplation stage which occurs before the preparation stage). Alternatively, the acronym PC-PAM-T may help you remember the names and order of the stages.\
\
4.\'a0**Motivational Interviewing:**\'a0Motivational interviewing (MI) is a \'93method for enhancing intrinsic motivation by exploring and resolving ambivalence\'94 (Miller & Rollnick, 2002, p. 25). It was originally developed as an intervention for substance use disorders but has since been applied to a number of other mental and physical health problems. MI incorporates elements of Rogers\'92s person-centered therapy and Prochaska and DiClemente\'92s transtheoretical model as well as Bandura\'92s concept of self-efficacy and Festinger\'92s notion of cognitive dissonance. Like the transtheoretical model, it assumes that interventions are most effective when they match the client\'92s stage of change. MI can be tailored for clients in any of the transtheoretical model\'92s stages of change, but it is considered to be particularly useful for reducing the resistance and ambivalence of clients who are in the precontemplation or contemplation stage (Miller & Rollnick, 2002).\'a0\
\
Strategies used to enhance a client\'92s motivation include evoking hope and confidence by, for example, (a) developing discrepancy by helping clients see the difference between their current behaviors and their values and goals and (b) eliciting and strengthening change talk, reducing sustain talk, and resolving discord.\'a0*Change talk*\'a0consists of statements that favor change \'96 e.g., I\'92d probably feel a lot better if I stopped smoking.\'a0*Sustain talk*\'a0consists of statements that favor maintaining the status quo \'96 e.g., I\'92m just not ready to stop smoking.\'a0*Discord*\'a0consists of statements that signal dissonance in the therapist-client relationship \'96 e.g., You just don\'92t understand what I\'92m going through. Another strategy is decisional balance (DB) which involves having the client identify the pros and cons of change. It was originally described by Miller and Rollnick as a useful technique for resolving a client\'92s ambivalence, but they subsequently concluded that it is appropriate only in certain situations. According to Miller & Rollnick (2009, 2013), DB is useful when a clinician\'92s goal is to maintain a neutral position about the direction of change while assessing a client\'92s readiness for change. However, it is contraindicated when the goal is to resolve the client\'92s ambivalence in order to promote change because, by identifying the negative consequences of changing, the client may actually become less willing to take steps to do so.\'a0\
\
Research has shown that MI is effective when used as a stand-alone treatment and can improve the benefits of other treatments when it is combined with them. For instance, Marker and Norton\'92s (2018) meta-analysis of the research found that patients with anxiety disorders who received MI prior to cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) exhibited greater symptom reduction than did patients who received CBT only. In addition, Randall and McNeil\'92s (2017) review of the research found that the combination of MI and CBT was more beneficial than CBT alone for several disorders, including general anxiety disorder (GAD) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Finally, there is evidence that, for some disorders and populations, MI has similar beneficial effects whether it is delivered in-person or via telehealth. As an example, King et al. (2020) compared the effectiveness of in-person therapy and videoconferencing for providing Brief Alcohol Screening and Intervention for College Students (BASICS), which is a brief intervention for high-risk drinking that combines MI with personalized feedback, harm reduction, and relapse prevention. The results of their study confirmed that both methods of delivering BASICS significantly reduced alcohol use and related problems.\
\
5.\'a0**Brief Psychodynamic Psychotherapy:**\'a0Brief psychodynamic psychotherapy encompasses several time-limited alternatives to longer-term psychodynamic psychotherapies. The different versions vary in terms of their explanations for the development of psychological problems, the issues they focus on in therapy, and the specific techniques they use. For example, some versions focus on unconscious conflicts, while others focus on dysfunctional interactional patterns. Despite their differences, the brief psychodynamic psychotherapies share several characteristics (Demos & Prout, 1993; Dewan, Weerasekera, & Stormon, 2009; Messer, 2001): \'a0First, they assume that change can occur during a brief therapeutic process or that therapy can begin a change process that will continue after therapy ends. Second, they agree that therapy should have limited goals that are identified and agreed upon by the client and therapist during the initial sessions of therapy. Third, practitioners of these therapies believe they are appropriate for only certain types of clients (e.g., clients who can benefit from insight-oriented therapy and are able to form a therapeutic alliance). Fourth, practitioners adopt an active role from the beginning of therapy to quickly establish a therapeutic alliance with clients and then to ensure that therapy stays focused on major issues so goals can be accomplished within the time limits of therapy. Fifth, practitioners emphasize the development of positive (versus negative) transference and may rely more on exploration or education than on interpretation. Sixth, due to the brevity of therapy, practitioners address loss, separation, and other concerns related to termination of therapy early in treatment.\
\
}