# Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies

**Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies

Beck’s Cognitive-Behavior Therapy:** Beck’s cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) was originally developed as an intervention for depression and is now considered to be an evidence-based treatment not only for depression but also for bipolar disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, PTSD, and a number of other psychiatric disorders. It has also been found useful as an adjunct treatment for chronic pain. For example, there is evidence that, for patients with rheumatoid arthritis, CBT is useful not only for reducing comorbid depression and anxiety but also for improving coping skills and self-efficacy and reducing pain intensity and fatigue, especially when CBT is provided early in the course of the disease (e.g., Dixon et al., 2007; Sharp, 2016; Shen et al., 2020). 

CBT is based on the assumption that psychological disturbance is due largely to maladaptive cognitive schemas, automatic thoughts, and cognitive distortions:

(a) *Cognitive schemas* are core beliefs that develop during childhood as the result of experience and certain biological factors such as biological reactivity to stress. Schemas are enduring, can be maladaptive or adaptive, and are revealed in automatic thoughts. Beck proposed that different disorders are associated with different maladaptive schemas, which are also known as cognitive profiles. According to Beck, the cognitive profile for depression consists of negative beliefs about oneself, the world, and the future.   

(b) *Automatic thoughts* are verbal self-statements or mental images that “come to mind spontaneously when triggered by circumstances … [and] intercede between an event or stimulus and the individual’s emotional and behavioral reactions” (Beck & Weishaar, 2014, p. 245). Automatic thoughts can be positive or negative. Negative automatic thoughts are characterized by a distortion of reality, emotional distress, and/or interference with the pursuit of life goals and can contribute to psychological distress (Beck, 1995). Practitioners of CBT often have clients record negative automatic thoughts outside therapy in a Dysfunctional Thought Record (DTR) whenever they feel their mood is worsening. When using a DTR, the client records the event or situation that led to an unpleasant emotion, the automatic thoughts that preceded the emotion, the type of emotion and its intensity on a scale from 0 to 100, an alternative rational response to the automatic thought, and the outcome (the emotion and any change in behavior elicited by the rational response).

(c) *Cognitive distortions* are systematic errors in reasoning that often affect thinking when a stressful situation triggers a dysfunctional schema that, in turn, affects the content of automatic thoughts. Common distortions include arbitrary inference, selective abstraction, dichotomous thinking, personalization, and emotional reasoning: *Arbitrary inference* involves drawing negative conclusions without any supporting evidence. *Selective abstraction* involves paying attention to and exaggerating a minor negative detail of a situation while ignoring other aspects of the situation. *Dichotomous thinking* is the tendency to classify events as representing one of two extremes – for example, as a success or a failure. *Personalization* involves concluding that one’s actions caused an external event without evidence for that conclusion. And *emotional reasoning* is reliance on one’s emotional state to draw conclusions about oneself, others, and situations.

The primary goals of CBT are “to correct faulty information processing and to help patients modify assumptions that maintain maladaptive behaviors and emotions” (Beck & Weishaar, 2014, p. 244). Practitioners of CBT adopt an active, structured approach and use a variety of cognitive and behavioral techniques to achieve these goals. Cognitive techniques include redefining the problem, reattribution, and decatastrophizing; behavioral techniques include activity scheduling, behavioral rehearsal, exposure therapy, and guided imagery (which is used to facilitate relaxation and decrease anxiety and pain). An essential feature of CBT is its reliance on *collaborative empiricism*, which is “a collaborative therapeutic alliance between the therapist and client in which they become coinvestigators as they examine the evidence to accept, support, reevaluate, or reject the client’s thoughts, assumptions, intentions, and beliefs” (Shiraev, 2017, p. 252). Another feature is the use of *Socratic dialogue*, which involves asking the client questions that are designed to clarify and define the client’s problems, identify the thoughts and assumptions that underlie those problems, and evaluate the consequences of maintaining maladaptive thoughts and assumptions.

**Other Cognitive-Behavioral Interventions:** For the exam, you also want to be familiar with the following cognitive-behavioral interventions.

1. **Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy:** Ellis’s rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT) attributes psychological disturbances to irrational beliefs, which tend to be “absolute (or dogmatic) and are expressed in the form of ‘must’s,’ ‘should’s,’ ‘ought’s,’ ‘have to’s,’ etc. … and lead to negative emotions that largely interfere with goal pursuit and attainment” (Ellis & Dryden, 1997, p. 5). “I must do well on all of the important projects I take on; if not, I’m an inadequate person” and “You must take care of me when I need you to do so; if not, you’re not a good person” are examples of irrational beliefs.
Ellis uses an *A-B-C-D-E model* to explain psychological disturbance and the process of change in therapy: A is an activating event, B is the client’s irrational belief about that event, C is the emotional or behavioral consequence of that belief, D is the therapist’s use of techniques that dispute the client’s irrational belief, and E is the effect of these techniques, which is the replacement of the irrational belief with a more rational one. Practitioners of REBT use a variety of cognitive, behavioral, and emotive techniques, including active disputation of irrational beliefs, rational-emotive imagery, systematic desensitization, and skills training. Research has found that REBT is an effective treatment for depression, anxiety, conduct problems, anger, and several other disorders and conditions (e.g., DiGiuseppe, 2010).

2. **Self-Instructional Training:** Self-instructional training (Meichenbaum, 1977) was initially developed to teach problem-solving skills to children with high levels of impulsivity but has since been applied to other populations and problems. It consists of five stages: During the initial *cognitive modeling stage*, children observe a model perform a task while the model verbalizes instructions aloud. In the second *overt external guidance stage*, children perform the same task while the model verbalizes the instructions. Next is the *overt self-guidance stage* in which children perform the task while verbalizing the instructions aloud themselves. This is followed by the *faded overt guidance stage* in which children perform the task while whispering the instructions. And finally, during the *covert self-instruction stage*, children perform the task while repeating the instructions subvocally. The instructions used by the model and children while performing the task address four skills: identifying the nature of the task, focusing attention on the task and the behaviors needed to complete it, providing self-reinforcement that sustains appropriate behavior, and evaluating performance and correcting errors.

3. **Stress Inoculation Training:** Stress inoculation training (Meichenbaum, 1996) focuses on improving the ability of clients to deal better with ongoing and future stressful situations by teaching them effective coping skills. It consists of three phases. During the initial *conceptualization/education phase*, clients are provided with information about stress and its effects and are encouraged to view stressful situations as “problems-to-be-solved” (p. 4). In the *skills acquisition and consolidation phase*, clients learn a variety of cognitive and behavioral coping skills which may include relaxation, self-instruction, and problem-solving. Finally, during the *application and follow-through phase*, clients use newly acquired coping skills, first in imagined and role-playing situations and then in real life situations. 

4. **Acceptance and Commitment Therapy:** Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is based on the assumptions that “psychological pain is both universal and normal and is part of what makes us human” (Boorman, Morris, & Oliver, 2017, p. 218) and that psychological inflexibility causes psychological problems and is characterized by a “rigid dominance of psychological reactions over chosen values and contingencies in guiding action” (Bond et al., 2011, p. 678). With regard to pain, ACT distinguishes between clean and dirty pain: *Clean pain* is also known as clean discomfort and refers to natural levels of physical and psychological discomfort that are inevitable and cannot be controlled. *Dirty pain* is also known as dirty discomfort and refers to the emotional suffering that’s caused by attempts to control or resist clean pain. 

The main goal of ACT is to increase psychological flexibility, which involves addressing six core processes that foster acceptance, mindfulness, commitment, and behavior change and counter the processes that contribute to psychological <u>in</u>flexibility: *Experiential acceptance* counters experiential avoidance and is “the active and aware embrace of private experiences without unnecessary attempts to change their frequency or form” (Hayes, Pistorello, & Levin, 2012, p. 982). *Cognitive defusion* counters cognitive fusion and is the ability to distance oneself from one’s thoughts and feelings and view them as experiences rather than reality. *Being present* counters attentional rigidity to the past and future and involves being in contact with whatever is happening in the present moment. *Awareness of self-as-context* counters attachment to the conceptualized self. It’s the ability to view oneself as the context in which one’s thoughts and feelings occur rather than as the thoughts and feelings themselves. *Values-based actions* counter unclear, compliant, or avoidant motives and depend on the ability to use one’s freely chosen values to guide one’s behaviors. And *committed action* counters inaction, impulsivity, and avoidant persistence and refers to a commitment to continue to act in ways consistent with one’s values in the future, even when faced with obstacles. Interventions target these six processes and include metaphors, mindfulness strategies, and experiential exercises. ACT is considered to be an evidence-based treatment for a number of conditions including chronic pain, psychosis, depression, anxiety disorders, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. 

5. **Mindfulness-Based Interventions:** Mindfulness refers to “moment-to-moment awareness of one’s experience without judgment” (Davis & Hayes, 2011, p. 198). It has been incorporated into several therapeutic approaches including acceptance and commitment therapy and dialectical behavior therapy and is the core strategy of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT). *MBSR* was originally developed “to make mindfulness meditation available and accessible in a Western medical setting while remaining true to the essence of Buddhist teachings” (Sauer & Baer, 2010, p. 4). It’s used to help people cope with stress, pain, and illness and consists of an eight-session group program that focuses on teaching participants several mindfulness meditation practices including awareness of breathing, yoga, and sitting and walking meditation. 
*MBCT* combines elements of MBSR and CBT. It was originally developed as a method for treating recurrent depression (Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2001), and research has confirmed that it’s an effective treatment not only for depression but also for a number of other conditions including anxiety, chronic pain, and insomnia. The primary goal of MBCT is to “enable clients to become self-aware, so they can learn to de-centre from distressing thoughts, feelings, bodily sensations and behaviours” (Scott & Adam, 2017, p. 246). It incorporates psychoeducation, mindfulness meditation practices, and cognitive-behavioral techniques and, like MBSR, usually consists of an eight-session group program.  

Based on their meta-analysis of research on the effectiveness of mindfulness-based interventions, Khoury and his colleagues (2013) concluded that they are effective for treating both psychological disorders and physical/medical conditions but are more effective for psychological disorders, especially depression, anxiety, and stress. Research has also been conducted to identify the change mechanisms that account for the beneficial effects of these interventions. A frequently cited systematic review and meta-analysis of this research conducted by Gu et al. (2015) found that there is consistent and strong research support for decreased emotional and cognitive reactivity as the change mechanism, moderate support for increased mindfulness and decreased rumination and worry, and insufficient support for increased self-compassion and psychological flexibility.

6. **Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Suicide Prevention:** There are several versions of cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention: Wenzel, Brown, and Beck’s (2009) *cognitive therapy for suicide prevention* (CT-SP) is a brief intervention that was designed to prevent repeat suicide attempts by adults who recently attempted suicide. It consists of three phases: conceptualization of the suicidal mode and developing a safety plan; acquisition of cognitive, behavioral, and affective coping skills; and consolidation of coping skills and relapse prevention. Bryan’s (2019) *cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention* (CBT-SP) is a brief treatment for suicidal patients, while Bryan and Rudd’s (2018) *brief cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention* (BCBT) is a version of CBT-SP for active-duty members of the military. CBT-SP and BCBT both focus on emotion regulation, cognitive flexibility, and relapse prevention. Finally, Stanley et al.’s (2009) *cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention* (also known as CBT-SP) was developed for adolescents who recently attempted suicide and combines elements of cognitive-behavioral therapy and dialectical behavior therapy. It consists of acute and continuation phases that include individual and family sessions: The acute phase consists of chain analysis (identification of events that led to the suicide attempt), safety planning, psychoeducation, addressing reasons for living, and case conceptualization. The continuation phase focuses on generalizing and consolidating behavioral and cognitive skills and relapse prevention. 

Safety planning is an essential component of cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention.  For example, Stanley and Brown (2012) developed a safety planning intervention (SPI) that can be used as a component of cognitive-behavioral therapy or as a stand-alone intervention in emergency departments or other emergency situations or any other time when longer-term care is not feasible or available. The SPI consists of six steps that start with the use of internal strategies and switch to external strategies when internal strategies do not work: (1) recognizing the warning signs of an imminent suicidal crisis, (2) using internal coping strategies (e.g., going for a walk, reading a book), (3) utilizing social contacts as a means of distraction or support, (4) contacting family or friends who may help resolve the crisis, (5) contacting mental health professionals or agencies, and (6) reducing access to lethal means. [Note that a safety plan is not the same as a no-suicide contract, which is a verbal or written agreement that requires clients to promise they will abstain from attempting suicide. While research has found the SPI and other safety plans to be useful for reducing suicidality, there is no empirical evidence supporting the use of no-suicide contracts (e.g., Ferguson et al., 2022; Rudd et al., 2006).]  

Finally, with regard to effectiveness, there is evidence that cognitive-behavioral therapies for suicide prevention reduce suicidal ideation and suicide attempts, feelings of hopelessness, and depression. The research has also found that these benefits occur regardless of a person’s gender, severity of suicidal ideation, and number of suicide attempts (Bryan et al., 2018; Bryan & Rudd, 2018).

**References:**
Beck, A. T., & Weishaar, M. E. (2014). Cognitive therapy. In D. Wedding, & R. J. Corsini (Eds.), *Current psychotherapies* (10th ed., pp. 231-264). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Beck, J. (1995). *Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond.* New York: Guilford Press.
Bond, F. W., Hayes, S. C., Baer, R. A., Carpenter, K. M., Guenole, N., Orcutt, H. K., Waltz, T., & Zettle, R. D. (2011). Preliminary psychometric properties of the Acceptance and Action Questionnaire-II: A revised measure of psychological flexibility and experiential avoidance. *Behavior Therapy, 42*, 676-688.
Boorman, J., Morris, E., & Oliver, J. (2017). Acceptance and commitment therapy. In C. Feltham, T. Hanley, & L. A. Winter (Eds.), *The SAGE handbook of counseling and psychotherapy* (pp. 218-223). London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Bryan, C. J. (2019). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention (CBT-SP). Implications for meeting standard of care expectations with suicidal patients. *Behavioral Science & Law, 37*(3), 247-258. 
Bryan, C. J., Peterson, A. L., & Rudd, M. D. (2018). Differential effects of brief CBT versus treatment as usual on posttreatment suicide attempts among groups of suicidal patients. *Psychiatric Services, 69*, 703-709. 
Bryan, C. J., & Rudd, M. D. (2018). *Brief cognitive-behavioral therapy for suicide prevention*. New York: Guilford Publications.
