# Prevention, Consultation, and Psychotherapy Research


**Prevention:** The most frequently cited models of prevention were developed by Gerald Caplan and Robert Gordon. 

**1. Caplan’s Model:** Caplan (1964) distinguished between three types of prevention: primary, secondary, and tertiary.

(a) The goal of *primary prevention* is to reduce the occurrence of new cases of a mental or physical disorder. Primary preventions are aimed at an entire population or group of individuals rather than specific individuals, and the population or group may or may not be restricted to people who are known to be at elevated risk for the disorder. Examples are a public education program about depression and suicide, a school-based program for fifth graders to prepare them for the transition to middle school, and prenatal care for low-income mothers.

(b) The goal of *secondary prevention* is to reduce the prevalence of a mental or physical disorder in the population through early detection and intervention. Secondary preventions are aimed at specific individuals who have been identified as being at elevated risk for the disorder. Providing tutoring to elementary school students who are beginning to have academic difficulties and using a screening test to identify individuals at risk for depression and then providing identified individuals with counseling are secondary preventions. 

(c) The goal of *tertiary prevention* is to reduce the severity and duration of a mental or physical disorder. Tertiary preventions target people who ­have already received a diagnosis of a mental or physical disorder and include relapse prevention and rehabilitation programs. Social skills training for patients with schizophrenia, halfway houses, and Alcoholics Anonymous are tertiary preventions. 

2. **Gordon’s Model:** Gordon’s (1983) model distinguishes between universal, selective, and indicated prevention: *Universal preventions* are aimed at entire populations or groups that are not restricted to individuals who are at risk for a disorder. A drug abuse prevention program for all high school students in a school district is a universal prevention. *Selective preventions* are aimed at individuals who have been identified as being at increased risk for a disorder due to their biological, psychological, or social characteristics. A drug abuse prevention program for adolescents whose parents have a substance use disorder is a selective prevention. *Indicated preventions* are for individuals who are known to be at high-risk because they have early or minimal signs of a disorder. A drug abuse prevention program for adolescents who have experimented with drugs is an indicated prevention.

The Institute of Medicine (Mrazek & Haggerty, 1996) expanded Gordon’s model to create a continuum of care model that includes prevention, treatment, and maintenance. In this model, universal, selective, and indicated preventions are restricted to people who have not received a diagnosis of a mental or physical disorder. Treatment strategies are aimed at people who have received a diagnosis, and maintenance strategies are for people who have received treatment for a disorder and focus on preventing chronicity or relapse and/or providing rehabilitation.   

**Mental Health Consultation:** Caplan (1970) distinguished between four types of mental health consultation. Each type consists of a triad that includes a consultant, a consultee (therapist or program administrator), and a client or program.

1. **Client-Centered Case Consultation:** This type of consultation focuses on a particular client of the consultee who is having difficulty providing the client with effective services (e.g., is having trouble identifying an appropriate treatment). The consultant’s goal is to provide the consultee with a plan that will benefit the client.

2. **Consultee-Centered Case Consultation:** Consultee-centered case consultation focuses on the consultee with the goal of improving his/her ability to work effectively with current and future clients who are similar in some way – e.g., clients with traumatic brain injury, clients from a specific racial/ethnic minority group. The goal of this type of consultation is to improve the consultee’s knowledge, skills, confidence, and/or objectivity. Caplan identified several factors that contribute to a consultee’s lack of objectivity. One of these is *theme interference*, which occurs when a consultee’s biases and unfounded beliefs interfere with his/her ability to be objective when working with certain types of clients. 

3. **Program-Centered Administrative Consultation:** This type of consultation involves working with program administrators to help them clarify and resolve problems they’re having with an existing mental health program. The consultant’s goal is to provide administrators with recommendations for dealing with the problems they’ve encountered in developing, administering, and/or evaluating the program.

4. **Consultee-Centered Administrative Consultation:** Consultee-centered administrative consultation focuses on improving the professional functioning of program administrators so they’re better able to develop, administer, and evaluate mental health programs in the future. 
Mental health consultation differs from *collaboration* in several ways. For example, a consultant has little or no direct contact with a consultee’s client and is not responsible for the client’s outcomes. In contrast, a collaborator usually has direct contact with the client and shares responsibility for the client’s outcomes.

**Interprofessional collaboration:** Interprofessional collaboration (IPC) is a “partnership between a team of health providers and a client in a participatory collaborative and coordinated approach to shared decision making around health and social issues” (Canadian Interprofessional Health Collective, 2010, p. 11). Dragan and Marino (2018) note that IPC most often occurs in primary care settings where it serves three primary functions: improvement of patient care, improvement of health outcomes for patients, and decreased healthcare costs. However, reviews of the research suggest that the effects of IPC in primary care settings are inconsistent. For example, in their overview of previous systematic reviews of IPC in primary care, Carron et al. (2021) report that, while most studies confirm that IPC has positive effects on clinical outcomes, the process of care, and patient satisfaction, the research has provided mixed results with regard to its effects on quality of life; physical, emotional, and social functioning; and health behaviors and practices. 
IPC is considered to be particularly useful for addressing the multiple and complex healthcare needs of older patients, and it is often referred to as integrated care in research involving members of this population. Results of this research provide some evidence that integrated care for older patients is associated with improved access to care; increased patient satisfaction with services provided; and fewer emergency department visits, hospitalizations, and long-term care placements (e.g., Baxter et al., 2018; Hebert et al., 2010).

**Efficacy and Effectiveness Research:** Much of the empirical research evaluating psychotherapy outcomes can be categorized as efficacy research or effectiveness research. *Efficacy research studies* are also known as clinical trials and maximize internal validity (the ability to draw conclusions about the cause-effect relationship between therapy and outcomes) by maximizing experimental control. For example, participants are randomly assigned to groups in these studies and therapists use treatment manuals to ensure that treatment is provided in the same way to all participants. In contrast, *effectiveness research studies* maximize external validity (the ability to generalize the conclusions drawn from the study to other people and conditions) by providing therapy in naturalistic clinical settings. Both approaches have strengths and weaknesses, and a useful strategy for evaluating treatment outcomes is to first conduct an efficacy study to determine a treatment’s effectiveness in well-controlled conditions, and then conduct an effectiveness study in “real world” settings to determine its generalizability, feasibility, and cost-effectiveness (Jacobson & Christensen, 1996).  

**Psychotherapy Outcome Research:** Frequently cited research on psychotherapy outcomes include studies conducted by Eysenck; Smith, Glass, and Miller; and Howard and his colleagues.

1. **Eysenck:** Hans Eysenck is probably best known for his conclusions about intelligence and personality: He proposed that intelligence is due primarily to heredity, with about 80% of variability in IQ scores being due to genetic factors. His personality theory also stresses the role of heredity and distinguishes between three major personality traits: extroversion, neuroticism, and psychoticism. Eysenck (1952) is also known for his controversial conclusions about the effectiveness of psychotherapy (1952), which were based on his review of 24 empirical studies that reported treatment outcomes for “neurotic” patients who participated in psychoanalytic or eclectic psychotherapy. Because the studies did not include no-treatment control groups, Eysenck used other studies to estimate the spontaneous remission rates of neurotic patients who received custodial care in an inpatient facility or medical care from a physician. Based on this data, Eysenck concluded that 44% of patients who participated in psychoanalytic psychotherapy, 64% of patients who participated in eclectic psychotherapy, and 72% of patients who did not participate in psychotherapy experienced an improvement in symptoms. He proposed that these results not only showed that psychotherapy is ineffective but that it may actually have detrimental effects since the average recovery rates for psychotherapy patients were lower than the average spontaneous remission rate for patients who did not receive psychotherapy.

Eysenck’s conclusions were challenged by advocates of psychotherapy who pointed out that his study had several methodological flaws. For example, Luborsky (1954) noted that the comparisons Eysenck made were questionable because patients were not randomly assigned to groups and, consequently, initial differences in patient characteristics could account for at least some of the differences in recovery rates. In addition, Bergin (1971) noted that the criteria Eysenck used to determine recovery were questionable and found that use of different criteria produced a recovery rate of 83% for patients who participated in psychoanalytic psychotherapy and 30% for patients who did not receive psychotherapy.

2. **Smith, Glass, and Miller:** Eysenck’s article generated a great deal of research on psychotherapy outcomes, and Smith, Glass, and Miller (1980) were the first to use *meta-analysis* to combine the results of studies that compared the outcomes of patients who received psychotherapy to the outcomes of patients in either a no-treatment control group or an alternative (non-therapy) treatment group. Their analysis included 475 studies and produced a mean effect size of .85, which means that the average patient who received psychotherapy was “better off” than 80% of patients who did not receive psychotherapy. [An effect size indicates the mean difference between groups in terms of a standard deviation, and an effect size of .85 indicates that the mean outcome score for patients who participated in psychotherapy was .85 standard deviation above the mean outcome score for patients who did not receive psychotherapy. In a normal distribution, 84% of scores are below a standard deviation of 1.0, and 80% (slightly less than 84%) are below a standard deviation of .85. Note that, for the exam, you just need to remember that an effect size of .85 means that the average patient who received psychotherapy was better off than 80% of patients who didn’t receive therapy. You do not need to understand why this is so, but we’ve included the explanation for those of you who are curious about the interpretation of an effect size of .85.]

3. **Howard and Colleagues:** Howard and his colleagues (1986, 1996) investigated the relationship between the duration of psychotherapy and its outcomes. Based on the results of their research, they developed two models to describe this relationship:

(a) The *dosage model* is also known as the dose-effect model and states that there’s a predictable relationship between number of therapy sessions and the probability of measurable improvement in symptoms. Specifically, it predicts that 50% of therapy clients can be expected to exhibit a clinically significant improvement in symptoms by six to eight sessions, 75% by 26 sessions, and 85% by 52 sessions. 

(b) The *phase model* proposes that psychotherapy outcomes can be described in terms of three phases: The initial *remoralization* phase occurs during the first few sessions and is characterized by an increase in hopefulness. This is followed by the *remediation phase*, which occurs during the next 16 sessions and involves a reduction in symptoms. The final *rehabilitation phase* involves “unlearning troublesome, maladaptive, habitual behaviors and establishing new ways of dealing with various aspects of life (e.g., problematic relationship patterns, faulty work habits, and trouble-causing personal attitudes)” (1996, p. 1061). An implication of this model is that different outcome measures should be used during different phases of therapy – i.e., measures of subjective well-being during the remoralization phase, the severity and frequency of symptoms during the remediation phase, and life functioning during the rehabilitation phase.

**Other Psychotherapy Research:** The following are other important issues related to psychotherapy research and outcomes.

1. **Common Factors in Psychotherapy:** Because the research has found that different psychotherapy approaches have similar beneficial effects (APA, 2012), a number of researchers have attempted to identify elements common to the various approaches that contribute to psychotherapy outcomes. For example, based on their review of the research, Norcross and Lambert (2011) attribute 30% of variability in psychotherapy outcomes to patient contributions, 12% to the therapeutic relationship, 8% to the treatment method, 7% to therapist characteristics, 3% to other factors, and 40% to unexplained variance.

2. **The Working Alliance:** The psychanalyst, Ralph Greenson (1967), was the first to describe the therapeutic relationship as consisting of three components: working alliance, real relationship, and transference-countertransference. Of these, the working alliance (which is also referred to as the therapeutic alliance) has been studied most extensively. As defined by Greenson, the working alliance is “the relatively non-neurotic, rational relationship between patient and analyst which makes it possible for the patient to work purposely in the analytic situation” (p. 46). Studies have identified the working alliance as a core common factor across all types of psychotherapy and have found a strong working alliance to be a significant predictor of successful psychotherapy outcomes. For example, a recent meta-analysis of the research by Fluckiger, Del Re, Wampold, and Horvath (2018) confirmed that, for adult therapy clients, “the positive relation of the alliance and outcome remains across assessor perspectives, alliance and outcome measures, treatment approaches, patient (intake-) characteristics, face-to-face and Internet-mediated therapies, and countries” (p. 316).

3. **Client-Therapist Matching:** The results of research investigating the effects of client-therapist matching in terms of race and ethnicity vary, depending on the outcome measure and clients’ race or ethnicity. For example, Cabral and Smith’s (2011) meta-analysis of the research produced an effect size of .32 for the impact of matching on clients’ perceptions of their therapists but an effect size of only .09 on measures of therapy outcome. In addition, Sue et al. (1991) found that the effects of matching on treatment outcomes varied, depending on client race/ethnicity: Their study indicated that racial/ethnic matching reduced premature termination rates for Asian, Hispanic, and European American clients but not for African American clients and that matching was associated with improved treatment outcomes only for Hispanic American clients. There’s also evidence that matching in terms of factors other than race and ethnicity are more important for therapy outcomes: Comas-Diaz (2012) report that their review of the research indicated that “clinicians’ cultural competence, compassion, and … worldview were more important than ethnic matching between client and clinician” (2012, p. 173).
Researchers have also investigated the effects of a client-therapist match in terms of personality on the process and outcomes of therapy. For example, Taber et al. (2011) examined the impact of client-therapist personality similarity as measured by Holland’s Self-Directed Search on the therapeutic alliance and therapy outcomes. The results of their study indicated that client-therapist personality congruence had a positive impact on the clients’ perceptions of the client-therapist alliance but did not have a direct effect on therapy outcomes. More recently, Perez-Rojas et al. (2021) looked at the effects of clients’ perceptions regarding similarity to their therapists in terms of the Big Five personality traits. They found that clients who perceived their therapists as being similar to them in terms of conscientiousness and openness to experience reported stronger relationships with their therapists and better progress in therapy.

4. **Utilization of Mental Health Care Services:** Research has found that utilization rates of mental health care services vary, depending on client gender, age, sexual orientation, and race/ethnicity. With regard to gender, the 2020 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS; Terlizzi & Norris, 2021) found that, for all adult respondents, women were more likely than men to have taken medication for mental health conditions and to have received counseling or therapy from a mental health professional in the previous 12 months. In terms of age, the 2021 NHIS (Terlizzi & Schiller, 2022) found that the percentage of adults who received any mental health treatment (therapy or medication) in the past 12 months was greatest for respondents ages 18 to 44 followed by, in order, those 45 to 64 years of age and those 65 years of age and older. 

The studies have also found that rates of mental health problems among college students and their utilization of mental health services have both increased in recent years. However, despite increased utilization rates, the majority of college students with mental health problems still do not seek services even when they are available (Bruffaerts et al., 2019). Most studies on treatment barriers have found that attitudinal barriers are more often cited by college students than are structural barriers (e.g., Ebert et al., 2019): Preferring to handle the problem alone,  preferring to talk to friends and family members about the problem, and being embarrassed are examples of attitudinal barriers; the cost of treatment and problems with time or scheduling are examples of structural barriers. Research results vary with regard to the effects of stigma (an attitudinal barrier): Studies have confirmed that higher levels of stigma are associated with lower willingness to seek mental health treatment and dropping out of treatment prematurely (e.g., Fullmer, et al., 2021). However, some research suggests that personal (self) stigma has declined in recent years while perceived (public) stigma has not changed (Lipson et al., 2019). Finally, there is evidence that education- and contact-based anti-stigma interventions have a positive impact on attitudes toward mental health treatment and willingness to seek treatment (Kosyluk et al, 2016): Education-based interventions challenge and replace stereotypes and myths about mental illness and its treatment with accurate information. Contact-based interventions provide face-to-face or internet-mediated contact with a person who has successfully managed a mental disorder.

In terms of sexual orientation, the studies have generally found that sexual minority (gay/lesbian and bisexual) men and women utilize mental health care services at higher rates than sexual majority (heterosexual) men and women do. For example, data from the 2013 to 2015 National Health Interview Surveys (Platt, Wolf, & Scheitle, 2018) revealed that sexual minority men and women were two to four times more likely than heterosexual men and women to have talked with a mental health professional in the past year. 

Finally, for members of different racial/ethnic minority groups, data from the 2021 National Survey of Drug Use and Health (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2022) indicated that, among adults ages 18 and older, the use of outpatient mental health services in the past year was highest for respondents who identified themselves as belonging to two or more racial groups followed by those who identified themselves as White and lowest for respondents who identified themselves as Asian. For inpatient mental health services, use was highest for respondents who identified themselves as belonging to two or more racial groups followed by those who identified themselves as American Indian or Alaska Native and lowest for respondents who identified themselves as Asian.

5. **Psychological Interventions and Medical Costs:** The American Psychological Association has concluded that research on psychotherapy outcomes has “demonstrated that courses of psychotherapy reduce overall medical utilization and expense” (2012, p. 2). For example, with regard to expense, Chiles, Lambert, and Hatch’s (1999) meta-analysis of research conducted between 1967 and 1997 indicated that participation in psychological interventions by patients undergoing surgery, patients with a history of medical overutilization, and patients receiving treatment for substance misuse or other psychological disorder usually resulted in a *medical cost offset*. They found that 90% of the studies included in their analysis reported evidence of a medical cost offset and that the average cost savings attributable to a psychological intervention was 20%.

6. **Economic Evaluation:** The economic evaluation of healthcare programs involves using information about program costs and benefits to inform decision-making. Cost-benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness analysis, and cost-utility analysis are three methods of economic evaluation. *Cost-benefit analysis* (CBA) can be used to compare the costs and benefits of one or multiple interventions. When using CBA, costs and benefits are both expressed in monetary terms. As an example, Knapp et al. (2013) compared individual placement and support (IPS) and standard vocational rehabilitation for helping people with severe mental disorders obtain employment. When the costs of implementing the two interventions and their benefits (as measured by expected earnings) were compared, IPS produced a greater net benefit. *Cost-effectiveness analysis* (CEA) is used to compare the costs and benefits of two or more interventions when benefits cannot be expressed as monetary values. The Knapp et al. study used cost-effectiveness analysis to compare the costs and benefits of IPS and standard vocational rehabilitation, with benefits being measured as percent of participants who worked for at least one day during the follow-up period, percent of participants who dropped out of the program they were assigned to, and percent of participants who had to be readmitted to the hospital. IPS was found to be more effective than vocational rehabilitation for all three benefits. Finally, *cost-utility analysis* (CUA) is used to compare the costs of two or more interventions on quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs), which combines measures of gain in the health-related quality and the quantity (duration) of life. For instance, Sava, Yates, Lupu, Szentagotai, and David (2009) used CUA to compare the costs and benefits in terms of QALYs of three treatments for depression: cognitive therapy (CT), rational-emotive behavior therapy (REBT), and fluoxetine (Prozac). Results indicated that CT and REBT both had greater cost-utility than fluoxetine but did not differ significantly from each other.

7. **Effects of Age, Gender, and Socioeconomic Status on Psychotherapy Outcomes:** Research investigating the effects of age, gender, and socioeconomic status on psychotherapy outcomes has not produced entirely consistent results, but the best overall conclusions are that they have little or no impact on outcomes and that apparent differences are due to other factors (Boswell, Constantino, & Anderson, 2016). For example, Nordberg and colleagues (2014) found that, when initial severity of symptoms was controlled, client age explained essentially none of the variance in psychotherapy outcomes. Also, while some studies have linked low socioeconomic status to premature termination, there’s evidence that this relationship is due to transportation difficulties and other factors. 

8. **Biases in Psychological Research and Theory:** Psychological research and theory can be affected by a number of biases, including gender biases and the WEIRD sampling bias. Gender biases can cause research results and conclusions drawn from those results to be nonrepresentative of the actual experiences and behaviors of men and/or women: *Alpha bias* is the tendency to exaggerate differences between men and women and can reinforce gender stereotypes and justify discriminatory practices. In contrast, *beta bias* is the tendency to ignore or minimize differences between men and women. It can lead to the erroneous conclusion that the results of research that included only male participants also apply to females, and vice versa. Alpha and beta biases have been linked to *androcentrism*, which means “male-centered” and occurs when male behaviors and traits are considered to be the norm while female behaviors and traits are viewed as deviations from the norm and often as abnormal or inferior. 

As described by Henrich, Heine, and Norenzayan (2010), WEIRD is an acronym for western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic cultures. According to these investigators, studies published in the world’s top journals have over-relied on samples drawn from WEIRD cultures and, consequently, their results may have limited generalizability. As an example, Henrich et al. note that the Big Five personality traits have been derived primarily from research that included WEIRD samples and argue that, as a result, conclusions about the universality of the Big Five drawn from this research may not be valid. Some evidence for this claim is provided by Gurven et al. (2013), who found that the Big Five personality traits do not accurately describe the personalities of a largely illiterate indigenous population of forager-farmers in the Bolivian Amazon. (Note, however, that the universality of the Big Five continues to be debated, with studies like Gurven et al.’s being criticized on methodological grounds.)

9. **Routine Outcome Monitoring:** Routine outcome monitoring (ROM) is also known as feedback-informed treatment and measurement-based care and is considered to be a transtheoretical and transdiagnostic evidence-based practice (Scott & Lewis, 2015). As described by Lewis et al. (2019), it consists of four components: “(1) a routinely administered symptom, outcome, or process measure …, ideally before each clinical encounter; (2) practitioner review of data; (3) patient review of data; and (4) collaborative reevaluation of the treatment plan informed by the data” (p. 326). ROM may involve the use of clinician rating scales but most often uses standardized patient self-report measures such as the Partners for Change Outcome Management System (PCOMS), which is used to assess a client’s progress and the quality of the therapeutic relationship (Lambert & Harmon, 2018). Studies have confirmed that ROM is more effective than less frequent feedback and is associated with several benefits including increased rates of clinically significant improvement and significant reductions in client deterioration during therapy and premature termination (e.g., Carlier & van Eeden, 2017; Fortney et al., 2017; Lambert, 2010; Lewis et al., 2019). In addition, a number of studies have found that ROM is most effective for clients who are at risk for treatment failure. 
Despite evidence of its benefits, ROM is underutilized by clinicians due to client and clinician barriers (e.g., Boswell, Kraus, Miller, & Lambert, 2015; Lewis et al., 2019): Client barriers include concerns about confidentiality and the time needed to complete the measures. Clinician barriers include the belief that information provided by ROM is not more accurate than clinical judgment; a lack of training in the use of ROM; unease about the potential effects of ROM on the therapeutic relationship; concerns about the time it takes to administer, score, and interpret measures, create a report, and provide feedback to clients; and concerns about how results of ROM will be used by employers and insurance companies.

10. **Transdiagnostic Treatments:** Transdiagnostic treatments are designed to address a range of diagnoses that not only share symptoms but also biological, psychological, and environmental mechanisms that increase the risk for and maintain those symptoms. “The premise underlying transdiagnostic treatments is that the commonalities across disorders outweigh the differences and that targeting the … [commonalities] may have a number of important benefits compared to diagnosis-specific approaches” (McEvoy, Nathan, & Norton, 2009, p. 21). For example, transdiagnostic treatments can reduce the cost and amount of time associated with training psychologists to deliver numerous diagnosis-specific interventions and they’re better suited than single-diagnosis treatments for addressing comorbidities. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of the research have generally confirmed that, in terms of effectiveness, transdiagnostic psychological treatments are equivalent or superior to comparison treatments (Dalgleish, Black, Johnston, & Bevan, 2020). For example, based on the results of their meta-analysis, Newby and colleagues (2015) concluded that transdiagnostic treatments are as effective as diagnosis-specific treatments for anxiety and may be more effective for depression.  

Some transdiagnostic treatments consist of evidence-based strategies that are applicable to disorders within a single diagnostic category, while others consist of strategies that are applicable to disorders from different categories. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy-Enhanced (CBT-E) is an example of the former and was designed as an intervention for anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and other eating disorders (Fairburn, Cooper, & Shafran, 2003). It is based on the assumption that these disorders share the same core psychopathology of overvaluation of body shape and weight (Fairburn et al., 2003). Examples of the latter include the following: (a) The Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders (UP; Barlow et al., 2011) is an emotion-focused, cognitive-behavioral intervention for anxiety, depression, and related disorders. It views neuroticism as the core characteristic shared by these disorders and focuses on mechanisms associated with neuroticism, including deficits in emotion regulation and avoidance of intense emotional experiences. (b) Emotion-Focused Therapy-Transdiagnostic (EFT-T; Timulak & Keogh, 2020) was developed as a treatment for depression, anxiety, and related disorders and targets the chronic painful emotions of loneliness/sadness, shame, and fear/terror that underlie these disorders. (c) Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) is a cognitive-behavioral intervention for a wide range of mental health and medical conditions. It is based on the assumption that “pain, grief, disappointment, illness, and anxiety are inevitable features of human life… [and its primary goal is] helping individuals adapt to these types of challenges by developing greater psychological flexibility” (Dindo, Van Liew, & Arch, 2017, p. 546). (d) Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) was originally developed as a treatment for disruptive behavior disorders but has since been found to be an effective intervention for anxiety, mood, and trauma-related disorders and child maltreatment. It is based on the premise that emotion dysregulation is “a core process in the etiology of myriad early-onset psychopathology symptoms” (Rothenberg, Weinstein, Dandes, & Jent, 2018, p. 720), and a primary goal of therapy is improving a child’s emotion regulation.

11. **Telepsychology and Evidence-Based Psychotherapy:** Telepsychology is also referred to as telehealth and telemental health and is “the provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies ... [that] include but are not limited to telephone, mobile devices, interactive videoconferencing, email, chat, text, and Internet (e.g., self-help websites, blogs, and social media)” (APA, 2013, p. 792). Interest in telepsychology has increased in recent years, especially with regard to the delivery of evidence-based psychotherapy (EBP). As noted by Wangelin, Szafranski, and Gros (2016), EBP delivered via telepsychology is associated with several benefits over EBP delivered in-person: It decreases patients’ and providers’ costs (e.g., costs related to travel and transportation); increases access to psychotherapy for individuals who have no or limited access  (e.g., for members of rural and underserved populations); and reduces the stigma and embarrassment that some individuals experience when receiving psychotherapy at treatment facilities. 

The research has also found that, despite the benefits of telepsychology, psychologists often express concerns about its use. For example, the American Psychological Association (2020) surveyed U.S. psychologists who were providing telehealth (mostly via videoconferencing) to some or all of their patients, and the majority stated that providing therapy via telehealth was more challenging than providing in-person therapy. When asked about the challenges their telehealth patients experienced, the most frequently cited challenge was internet access or connectivity followed by, in order, general technical difficulties and finding a private place to connect from. In addition, Watson et al. (2023) asked a sample of U. S. psychologists to select the barriers that impeded their own use of telehealth from a list of 19 barriers. The most frequently selected barriers were, in order, inadequate access to technology, diminished therapeutic alliance, technological issues, diminished quality of delivered care or effectiveness, and privacy concerns.
A number of studies have been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions delivered via telehealth for a variety of psychiatric disorders including the following:

**a. Anxiety Disorders:** There’s evidence that psychotherapy delivered via telepsychology is effective not only for treating individual anxiety disorders but also for treating comorbid anxiety and mood disorders. For example, Berryhill and colleagues (2019b) conducted a systematic review of studies evaluating the effectiveness of videoconference-delivered psychotherapy – most often cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) – for treating panic disorder with agoraphobia, generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder. Their analysis indicated that the majority of studies found significant improvement in anxiety symptoms following participation in videoconferencing psychotherapy, with controlled studies finding no significant differences between videoconferencing and in-person therapy. In addition, Stubbings, Rees, Roberts, and Kane (2013) compared videoconferencing-delivered CBT to in-person CBT and found them to be similarly effective for reducing comorbid anxiety and depression and improving quality of life. 

**b.** **Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD):** Most studies evaluating the use of telepsychology for treating PTSD have found it to be comparable to face-to-face interventions in terms of effectiveness. For example, in their systematic review of studies evaluating telepsychology for veterans with PTSD, Turgoose, Ashwick, and Murphy (2018) found that trauma-focused therapies (e.g., exposure therapy, behavioral activation) delivered via telepsychology or in-person were similar in terms of the reduction of PTSD symptoms, attendance and dropout rates, client satisfaction, and therapist fidelity to treatment protocols. However, the studies included in their review did not provide entirely consistent results with regard to the therapeutic alliance: While therapists providing telepsychology said they didn’t have trouble developing rapport with clients, some reported barriers to developing a therapeutic alliance, such as the inability to detect nonverbal communications. 

**c.** **Major Depressive Disorder:** The research has demonstrated the effectiveness of telepsychology for treating major depressive disorder. In their systematic review of studies comparing videoconferencing and in-person psychotherapy, Berryhill and colleagues (2019a) found that most studies reported statistically significant decreases in depressive symptoms following videoconferencing psychotherapy, with no statistical differences between videoconferencing and in-person groups receiving the same intervention. There’s also evidence that telepsychology is useful for alleviating the insomnia and chronic pain that often accompany depression (Wangelin, Szafranski, & Gros, 2016). Finally, while a study evaluating the effectiveness of telephone-administered CBT found it to have a lower attrition rate than in-person CBT had, other studies have found that attrition rates for other modes of telepsychology vary, depending on the population and type of intervention (Bee et al., 2008; Mohr et al., 2012). 

**d. Bulimia Nervosa:**  Research evaluating telepsychology-delivered treatments for bulimia nervosa (BN) has found that it has beneficial effects but is not necessarily as effective as in-person treatments. For example, Mitchell et al. (2008) compared videoconference-delivered and in-person delivered versions of manual-based CBT for BN. Overall, the results indicated that the two versions had similar attrition rates and that both produced beneficial effects on outcome measures following treatment. However, there were some differences: Patients receiving in-person CBT had non-significantly higher rates of abstinence from binge eating and purging and significantly greater reductions in eating disordered cognitions and depression. In a more recent study, Zerwas and colleagues (2017) compared a manualized version of CBT group therapy for BN delivered via an Internet chat group and the same treatment delivered via traditional face-to-face group therapy. They found that patients in both groups experienced a decrease in binge eating and purging and comorbid symptoms of depression and anxiety but that the pace of recovery was slower for patients who received therapy via the Internet. Several investigators have identified reasons why CBT for bulimia and other eating disorders might be more effective when it is delivered in-person. For example, Gros et al. (2013) note that regular in-session weight measurement is an important component of CBT for eating disorders but may be omitted when it is delivered via video telehealth because of difficulties in moving the camera to record the client’s weight and other logistical problems.

12. **Stepped Care:** “Stepped care is a model of healthcare delivery with two fundamental features. First, the recommended treatment within a stepped care model should be the least restrictive of those currently available, but still likely to provide significant health gain. Second, the stepped care model is self-correcting … [which means] that the results of treatments and decisions about treatment provision are monitored systematically, and changes are made (‘stepping up’) if current treatments are not achieving significant health gain” (Bower & Gilbody, 2005, p. 11). The primary goals of stepped care are to increase the efficiency of health care services and the accessibility of effective treatments through better allocation of scarce mental health resources. 

There are several models of stepped care: Some apply to specific disorders, while others are non-specific and can be applied to various disorders and conditions. With regard to the former, commonly cited models for depression usually include four steps that are similar to those described by Broten, Naugle, Kalata, and Gaynor (2011): 

*Step 1 - Assessment and Monitoring:* This step includes evaluating the patient’s symptoms and “watchful waiting” which is appropriate for patients with minor depressive symptoms and involves monitoring their symptoms. 

*Step 2 – Interventions Requiring Minimal Practitioner Involvement:* Step 2 interventions include psychoeducation about the symptoms and course of depression, treatment options, and signs of relapse; bibliotherapy as a preventive technique for patients who are at high risk for depression or are experiencing an increase in symptoms and as an adjunct to other treatments; and computer-based interventions that track patients’ symptoms and use multimedia with interactive components designed to help patients cope with depression and anxiety.

*Step 3 – Interventions Requiring More Intensive Care and Specialized Training:* This step may include group therapy, individual psychotherapy, and/or medication. (Note that some models identify group psychotherapy and brief individual psychotherapy as initial choices for this step followed by longer-term psychotherapy with or without antidepressant medication for patients who do not respond adequately to group or brief individual therapy.)

*Step 4 – Most Restrictive and Intensive Forms of Care:* This step is for patients with severe depressive symptoms and consists of voluntary or mandated inpatient care.

13. **Treatment Fidelity:** Treatment fidelity is also known as intervention fidelity, program fidelity, and implementation fidelity. It refers to the degree to which a treatment is delivered as intended and is affected by the therapist’s adherence to the treatment protocol and competence in delivering the treatment. Research has confirmed that treatment fidelity is important for both research and clinical practice: In research, a treatment’s effectiveness cannot be adequately evaluated without high fidelity. In clinical practice, when fidelity is low, it is not possible to determine if poor or unexpected treatment outcomes are due to how the treatment was implemented or to other factors. As noted by Breitenstein et al. (2010), “diminished fidelity may be why interventions that work well in highly controlled trials may fail to yield the same outcomes when applied in real life contexts” (p. 164). Breitenstein et al. state that measures of fidelity for community-based interventions are usually tailored to the particular intervention but often take the form of self-reports by the practitioner and intervention participant and/or observations of in vivo or recorded intervention sessions by a trained observer who rates the practitioner’s adherence and competence.

**Digital Mental Health Interventions (DMHI):** DMHIs “use online and/or mobile formats to deliver psychological strategies and interventions … [and] range from self-guided tools to facilitate a skill or behavioral strategy (e.g., track activity or mood, self-monitor eating behaviors, increase relaxation/practice meditation), to more complex and comprehensive interventions [e.g., cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for depression]” (Graham et al., 2020, p. 1081). The results of studies on DMHIs suggest there is a research-to-practice gap (Carlbring et al., 2018; Mohr et al., 2017): Randomized controlled trials (efficacy studies) confirm they can have outcomes similar to those of face-to-face psychotherapy. However, implementation (effectiveness) research in health care settings has produced less supportive results and suggests that this is due to several factors, including inconsistent use by patients, the uncertainty of providers about how to engage patients, and lack of clarity about how providers should integrate digital interventions into the overall care of patients. DMHIs sometimes include support by a professional or paraprofessional, and research investigating the impact of human support has most often confirmed that it has beneficial effects. For example, Werntz et al. (2023) conducted a systematic meta-review of 31 meta-analyses of studies comparing human support versus no support for a variety of mental health conditions and for type of support. They found that, of the 45 effect sizes reported in the meta-analyses, 22 indicated that support was significantly better than no support in terms of outcomes and 13 indicated that support was slightly (non-significantly) better than no support. Of the remaining effect sizes, 4 indicated no significant difference between support and no support, and 6 indicated that non-support was significantly or non-significantly better than support. They also found no consistent differences in outcomes when support was provided by a therapist or other professional or by a peer, staff member, or other nonprofessional.

**Models of Disability:** As described in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a person with a disability has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity, has a record of such impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment because of an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment. Experts distinguish between a variety of disability models, but most categorizations include the medical and social models. For example, the American Psychological Association’s (2012) *Guidelines for the Assessment of and Intervention with Persons with Disabilities* distinguishes between four scientific models of disability: biomedical, social, functional, and forensic. The *biomedical model* is also known as the medical model and views disabilities as medical conditions that deviate from the norm and disrupt a person’s physical and/or cognitive functioning. From this perspective, a disability is intrinsic to the individual and the focus of intervention is on identifying and providing treatments that will manage, alter, or cure the medical condition causing the disability. The *social model* views a disability as a difference rather than an abnormality or deficiency and as due primarily to aspects of society that create barriers for people with disabilities (e.g., negative attitudes, discrimination, exclusion, architectural barriers). Interventions based on this model focus on making societal and environmental changes. The *functional model* views a disability as the cause of a person’s inability to perform his or her function or role at work or elsewhere. It recognizes a person’s medical condition but focuses on identifying what accommodations, modifications, or assistive technology devices are needed to improve the person’s functioning (Chronister & Fitzgerald, 2018). Finally, the *forensic model* focuses on legal concepts and “requires objective proof of impairment and disability and determination of the honesty and motivation of individuals seeking recognition, benefits, or compensation for disability” (APA, 2012, p. 45). In other words, the primary focus of this model is on distinguishing between honest and dishonest people (e.g., malingerers) in order to identify the appropriate interventions or consequences.

