# Organizational Decision-Making


Organizational decisions are often classified as programmed or nonprogrammed:  *Programmed decisions* are repetitive and routine decisions that are governed by rules, policies, and procedures and are often made by lower-level personnel. Included in this category are decisions related to hiring, ordering, and billing. In contrast, *nonprogrammed decisions* are non-repetitive and complex, require unique or creative solutions, and rely on the decision-maker’s judgment and problem-solving skills. These decisions are usually made by upper-level personnel and include decisions related to developing new products or services and responding to legal issues.

Researchers interested in organizational decision-making have proposed several decision-making models and identified factors that affect group decisions. 
**1. Decision-Making Models:** Models of organizational decision-making include the rational, bounded rationality, and organizational process models:
(a) The *rational model* (e.g., Harrison, 1975) is also known as the classical model and the rational-economic model. It assumes that decision-makers choose the optimal alternative after identifying and evaluating all possible alternatives in an objective, deliberate, and orderly way. 
(b) The *bounded rationality model* (Simon, 1957) recognizes that rational decision-making is limited by organizational and individual factors such as time restrictions, limited access to information, and the cognitive abilities of the decision maker. It proposes that, as a result of these factors, people often “satisfice” (rather than “optimize”) when making decisions by considering alternatives only until a minimally acceptable alternative is found. 
(c) According to the *organizational process model* (Cyert & March, 1963), organizational decisions are often made by many individuals or groups, are constrained by the organization’s routines and standard operating procedures, and often follow and depend on “small incremental choices made in response to short-term conditions” (Nahavandi, Denhardt, Denhardt, & Aristigueta, 2015, p. 248). 

**2. Group Decision-Making:** There’s some evidence that group decisions are often better than decisions made by an average (but not necessarily the most competent) individual (e.g., Hill, 1982). However, there’s also data indicating that the effectiveness of group and individual decisions depends on the nature of the task and the situation. For example, groups tend to outperform individuals in terms of decision-making when the task is complex and group members have complementary skills, while individuals outperform groups when the task is poorly structured and requires a high degree of creativity (e.g., Gigone & Haste, 1997; Wanous & Youtz, 1986). The research has also found that group decisions can be undermined by groupthink and group polarization:
(a) As defined by Janis, *groupthink* occurs when people “are deeply involved in a cohesive in-group … [and their] strivings for unanimity override their motivation to realistically appraise alternative courses of action” (1982, p. 9). In addition to a high level of cohesiveness, the risk for groupthink is increased when the group has a strong directive leader, is isolated from outside opinions, and must make an important decision quickly. Janis also described the symptoms of groupthink and methods for avoiding it: Symptoms include illusions of invulnerability and superior morality, use of collective rationalization, excessive stereotyping, self-censorship, and the presence of self-appointed “mindguards” who shield group members from contradictory information. Group leaders can reduce the risk for groupthink by remaining neutral in the beginning of a discussion, encouraging members to express their opinions, appointing a member to play devil’s advocate, and bringing in outside opinions.

(b) *Group polarization* is the tendency of groups to make more extreme (more risky or more cautious) decisions than individual group members would make alone. Research suggests that group polarization occurs after group discussions have provided opportunities for social comparison and exposure to persuasive arguments (Bordens & Horowitz, 2012). (The tendency of groups to make more risky decisions is also referred to as the *risky shift*.)
