# Organizational Leadership


**Characteristics of Effective Leaders**: Organizational psychologists and others interested in leadership have investigated characteristics that are associated with leader effectiveness.

1. **Leader Intelligence and Personality:** Several traits have been found to correlate with leader effectiveness, but the correlation coefficients are usually low to moderate:  Judge, Colbert, and Ilies’s (2004) meta-analysis of the research produced a corrected correlation coefficient of .27 between leader *intelligence* and leader effectiveness. The results also indicated that intelligence is a better predictor of effectiveness when the leader’s stress level is low and the leader has a directive (rather than participative) leadership style. Judge, Bono, Ilies, and Gerehardt’s (2002) meta-analysis found that, of the Big Five personality traits, *extraversion and conscientiousness* have the largest correlation coefficients with leader effectiveness (.31 and .28, respectively). (Domain 5, Assessment and Diagnosis, KN34)
2. **Leader Behavior:** Research conducted at Ohio State University in the 1950s (Fleishman &  Harris, 1962) found that leader behaviors represent two independent dimensions: Leaders high in *initiating structure* are task-oriented and focus on achieving performance goals, while leaders high in *consideration* are person-oriented and focus on fostering the trust and respect of subordinates. Because the two dimensions are independent, leaders can exhibit high levels of both dimensions, low levels of both dimensions, or a high level of one dimension and low level of the other dimension. Studies investigating the effects of initiating structure and consideration have produced inconsistent results. However, the results of one meta-analysis (Judge, Piccolo, & Ilies, 2004) found that a high level of consideration was more strongly associated with subordinate satisfaction and motivation, while a high level of initiating structure was more strongly associated with leader, group, and organization performance. (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

3. **Leader Gender:** The studies suggest that, overall, male and female leaders are not rated differently in terms of their effectiveness (e.g., Paustian-Underdahl, Walker, & Woehr, 2014). There is some evidence, however, that female leaders are perceived to be more effective in social service agencies and other traditionally “feminine” settings, while male leaders are perceived to be more effective in military and other traditionally “masculine” settings (Eagly, Karau, & Makhijani, 1995). With regard to leadership style, men and women do not differ significantly in terms of task- and person-orientation, but female leaders are more likely to adopt a participative (democratic) style, while male leaders are more likely to adopt a directive (autocratic) style (Eagly & Johnson, 1990). In addition, a meta-analysis of research on gender and transformational, transactional, and laissez-faire leadership (Eagly, Johannesen-Schmidt, & van Engen, 2003) found that female leaders are more likely than male leaders to have a transformational leadership style but to also provide employees with contingency rewards, which is characteristic of transactional leadership. In contrast, male leaders are more likely to engage in management-by-exception, which is characteristic of transactional leadership, and in behaviors characteristic of laissez-faire leadership (e.g., adopt a “hands-off” approach and provide little guidance to employees). (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

4. **Leader Power:** French and Raven (1958) identified five bases of social power that leaders use to influence subordinates: Leaders have (a) *reward power* when they have control over financial and nonfinancial rewards; (b) *coercive power* when they have control over punishments; (c) *legitimate power* because of their formal positions, roles, and titles; (d) *expert power* because of their knowledge and expertise; and (e) *referent power* when they’re respected and admired by subordinates. According to Yukl (2002), the different bases of power are likely to produce different outcomes: Coercive power is most likely to elicit resistance from subordinates, reward and legitimate power are most likely to elicit compliance, and expert and referent power are most likely to elicit commitment. (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

**Theories of Leadership:** Theories that address factors that contribute to effective leadership include the following:
1. **Fiedler’s Contingency Model:** Fiedler’s (1978) contingency model is based on the assumption that the most effective leadership style depends on the favorableness of the situation.

(a) With regard to style, Fiedler believed that leaders are primarily task-oriented or person-oriented. He determined a leader’s orientation using the Least Preferred Coworker (LPC) scale, which requires a leader to rate his or her least preferred coworker on a set of bipolar adjectives (e.g., friendly/unfriendly, open/guarded). *Low LPC leaders* are task-oriented and describe their least preferred coworker in negative terms because they focus on the coworker’s task performance. *High LPC leaders* are person-oriented and describe their least preferred coworker in positive terms because they can separate the coworker’s interpersonal characteristics from his/her task performance. (Domain 5, Assessment and Diagnosis, KN34)

(b) *Favorableness of the situation* refers to the degree of influence a leader has over subordinates. It’s affected by three factors – leader member relations (good or poor), task structure (structured or unstructured), and position power (strong or weak). These three factors combine to produce a very favorable, moderately favorable, or unfavorable situation. (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

According to Fiedler, low LPC leaders are most effective in very unfavorable and very favorable situations, while high LPC leaders are most effective in moderately favorable situations. In contrast to most other leadership theories, Fiedler believed that a leader’s style is stable and, to be effective, a leader must change the situation to fit his or her style. (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

2. **Situational Leadership Theory:** Hersey and Blanchard’s (1988) situational leadership theory proposes that the optimal leadership style depends on a subordinate’s *job maturity*, which is determined by the subordinate’s willingness (motivation) and ability to perform the job. It distinguishes between four leadership styles that combine different levels of task- and relationship-orientation: (a) A *telling leader* has a high-task, low-relationship style and is best for subordinates who are low in both willingness and ability. (b) A *selling leader* has a high-task, high-relationship style and is best for subordinates who are high in willingness and low in ability. (c) A *participating leader* has a low-task, high-relationship style and is best for subordinates who are low in willingness and high in ability. (d) A *delegating leader* has a low-task, low-relationship style and is best for subordinates who are high in both willingness and ability. This theory assumes that employees ordinarily change in terms of willingness and ability over time in a way that requires leaders to become less directive and more participative. (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

3. **Path-Goal Theory:** House’s (1971) path-goal theory is based on the assumption that effective leaders act as facilitators who help subordinates achieve their own goals. To do so, a leader must adopt one of *four leadership styles* (directive, achievement-oriented, supportive, or participative), with the best style depending on certain characteristics of the subordinate and the subordinate’s task. For example, the directive style is most effective when subordinates are dogmatic or authoritarian and the task is ambiguous and complex, while the supportive style is best when subordinates have a high need for affiliation and low job satisfaction and the task is mundane and unchallenging. (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)  

4. **Vroom-Yetton-Jago Contingency Model:** The Vroom-Yetton-Jago (Vroom & Jago, 1988; Vroom & Yetton, 1973) contingency model views leadership as a decision-making process. The original version of the model provided a *decision tree* to help leaders determine the optimal leadership strategy for a given set of conditions, while the current version provides *decision matrices* for different situations. Use of a matrix requires the leader to consider several factors, including his/her own level of expertise, the employees’ level of expertise, and the importance of employees’ commitment to the chosen course of action. Based on the leader’s rating of each factor as high or low in importance, the matrix indicates which strategy the leader should adopt. There are five strategies that range from highly autocratic (make the decision alone) to highly democratic (let group members make the decision). (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

5. **Leader-Member Exchange Theory:** Dansereau, Graen, and Haga’s (1975) leader-member exchange (LMX) theory is based on the assumption that leader effectiveness and subordinate outcomes are determined by the quality of the interactions between the leader and the subordinate, and proposes that subordinates are treated as in-group or out-group members based on whether or not the leader perceives them as being competent, trustworthy, and willing to assume responsibility. *In-group members* receive more attention and support from the leader, participate in decision-making, and are given interesting and challenging tasks, while *out-group members* have a more formal relationship with the leader and are given direct orders and less interesting, routine tasks. Compared to out-group members, in-group members have higher levels of job satisfaction, job performance, organizational commitment, and organizational citizenship (Gerstner & Day, 1997). (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)

6. **Transformational versus Transactional Leadership:** Transformational leadership involves an “interplay between leaders and followers in which each raises the other to higher levels of ethics, morality, and motivation” (Landy & Conte, 2016, p. 462). Transformational leadership has four characteristics (Bass, 1997; Bass & Steidlmeier, 1999): (a) *Idealized influence* refers to the leader’s charisma and ability to act as a positive role model. (b) *Inspirational motivation* is the leader’s ability to create and communicate a vision for the future by, for example, using framing (describing goals in ways that make them meaningful). (c) *Intellectual stimulation* is the leader’s ability to stimulate creativity and critical thinking. (d) *Individualized consideration* refers to the leader’s ability to foster each employee’s growth by providing personal attention, support, and encouragement. Transformational leadership is distinguished from transactional leadership. Two defining characteristics of transactional leadership are the use of contingent rewards and management-by-exception (Bass, 1990): Transactional leaders make rewards contingent on performance by informing employees what tasks and goals must be accomplished and the rewards they will receive for accomplishing them. Management-by-exception (MBE) refers to how transactional leaders intervene to correct employee mistakes or rule violations and can be active or passive: Active MBE occurs when leaders closely monitor the behaviors of employees and take immediate action when necessary to keep mistakes or rule violations from becoming major problems. Passive MBE occurs when leaders do not closely monitor employee behaviors and take corrective action only when serious mistakes or rule violations have already occurred. (Domain 6, Treatment, Intervention, Prevention and Supervision, KN46)