# Training Methods and Evaluation

The development of a training program begins with a *needs analysis*, which is also known as *needs assessment* and is conducted to identify training needs. It ordinarily includes four analyses: (a) an organizational analysis to identify organizational goals and determine if employee performance problems are due to a lack of training or to inadequate selection procedures or other factors; (b) a task (job) analysis to identify the tasks required to perform the job and the knowledge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics (KSAOs) required to successfully perform each task; (c) a person analysis to identify which employees have deficiencies that require training; and (d) a demographic analysis to identify the training needs of specific groups of workers such as older versus younger workers. The results of the needs analysis are used to identify training goals and the best methods for achieving those goals.

1. **Training Methods**: The various methods of training are categorized as on-the-job or off-the-job. *On-the-job methods* involve having inexperienced employees observe and learn about the job from a supervisor or experienced employee. On-the-job methods include apprenticeships, internships, coaching, mentoring, job rotation, and cross-training. Job rotation involves having the trainee rotate through a pre-determined set of jobs within the organization and is often used to train managers. Cross-training involves teaching employees how to perform the essential tasks performed by other employees and is usually used to train members of a team or other work unit who are performing similar or related jobs. Two advantages of on-the-job training are that it’s usually less costly than off-the-job training and it alleviates problems related to transfer of training. Major disadvantages are the potential for errors, safety problems, and a slowdown or disruption of productivity. 

*Off-the-job methods* take place at a site away from the actual worksite. Included in this category are classroom lectures, technology-based training, behavior modeling, and simulation training. Behavior modeling is based on Bandura’s (1986) social learning theory and involves having trainees observe a model perform the desired behaviors. Trainees are then given feedback and reinforcement while they practice the modeled behaviors. Simulation training takes place in an environment that’s similar to the actual work environment and is useful when on-the-job training would be too costly or dangerous. Vestibule training is a type of simulation training that allows trainees to acquire skills using the actual machinery or equipment they’ll use on-the-job. Advantages of off-the-job training are that it provides greater control over the training environment, allows a large number of employees to be trained at the same time, and permits the use of multiple training methods. Disadvantages are that, in some situations, it may cost more than on-the-job training and it may not provide adequate transfer of training.

2. **Mentoring and Coaching:** The terms “mentoring” and “coaching” are sometimes used interchangeably, but they actually have distinct meanings. *Mentoring* is a relationship between a mentor (more experienced person) and a mentee (less experienced person) in which the mentor provides support and guidance to the mentee to assist with the mentee’s professional development. Mentoring incorporates two functions (Ragins & Kram, 2007): (a) Career functions depend on the mentor’s status and influence in the organization and are behaviors that prepare mentees for career advancement within their organizations. These behaviors include acting as a trainer or tutor, sponsoring the advancement of mentees, and increasing the exposure and visibility of mentees. (b) Psychosocial functions depend on the interpersonal bond between the mentor and mentee and include role-modeling, offering advice, providing support, and engaging in other behaviors that promote the mentee’s personal and professional growth and feelings of self-confidence and self-efficacy. 

*Coaching* is “a process used to encourage employees to accept responsibility for their own performance, to enable them to achieve and sustain superior performance, and to treat them as partners in working toward organizational goals and effectiveness” (Werner & DeSimone, 2012, p. 327). It consists of two activities: (a) Coaching analysis involves identifying the conditions that contribute to the employee’s satisfactory and unsatisfactory performance, and (b) coaching discussions are direct communications between the coach and employee that are aimed at helping the employee achieve and maintain optimal performance. In contrast to mentoring, coaching focuses on performance rather than career and personal development; is more formal and structured and has regularly scheduled meetings, specific tasks, and measurable goals; has a shorter duration and is usually time-bound; and typically addresses the needs of both the employee and the organization rather than the needs of the employee only (Passmore, 2007). In addition, the agenda for coaching is co-created by the coach and employee, while the agenda for mentoring is set by the mentee with the mentor providing support for that agenda. Specific types of coaching include executive coaching, which focuses on an executive’s leadership skills and ability to achieve short- and long-term organizational goals, and team coaching, which focuses on interpersonal dynamics and improving the ability of a team to achieve its goals.

3. **Factors that Affect Learning:** Research has identified several factors that affect the degree to which trainees acquire and retain new information and skills (Landy & Conte, 2016; Werner & DeSimone, 2012):

(a) *Distributed versus Massed Practice:* For most tasks, distributed (spaced) practice is more effective than massed practice: Distributed practice involves providing opportunities for learning and practice in multiple sessions with periods of rest between sessions, while massed practice involves providing opportunities for learning practice in one session.

(b) *Whole-Task versus Part-Task Training:* Whole-task training involves teaching an entire task at once, while part-task training involves dividing the task into subtasks and teaching each subtask separately. The best approach depends on the type of task: Whole-task training is more effective when the task is highly organized and subtasks are highly interrelated.

(c) *Overlearning:* Overlearning refers to learning or practicing beyond the point of mastery and results in automaticity, which occurs when information is recalled or a behavior is performed with little conscious effort or awareness. Automaticity is especially important for tasks that are performed relatively infrequently and when correct performance is essential because errors can have serious negative consequences. (Be careful not to confuse overlearning and *overtraining*. Overtraining refers to the physical and psychological symptoms that can occur when athletic training is excessive. Symptoms include decreased performance, fatigue, persistent muscle and joint soreness, gastrointestinal problems, apathy, depression, and anxiety. )

4. **Factors that Affect Transfer of Training:** The following practices have been found to maximize transfer of training (Landy & Conte, 2016; Werner & DeSimone, 2012):

(a) *Identical Elements:* According to the principle of identical elements, the more similar the training and work situations are, the greater the transfer of training. Identical elements is also referred to as physical and psychological fidelity: Physical fidelity refers to how similar the physical training and physical work conditions are, while psychological fidelity refers to the degree to which training helps trainees acquire the KSAOs needed to perform the job.
(b) *Stimulus Variability:* Transfer of training is maximized when a variety of stimuli are used during training. This includes using multiple examples of a concept and providing opportunities to practice a behavior in a variety of conditions.

(c) *Support:* Transfer of training is affected by the amount of support trainees receive for using newly acquired skills and knowledge on-the-job. An organization provides support by maintaining a transfer of training climate that emphasizes the importance of training and offers sufficient peer and supervisor support and opportunities to use new skills and knowledge. 

5. **Training Evaluation:**  Scriven (1967) coined the terms “formative” and “summative” to describe the two main functions of training program evaluation: A *formative evaluation* is conducted to assist with the development and improvement of a program, while a *summative evaluation* is conducted to determine whether program outcomes met the program’s goals. As described by Trochim (2020), formative and summative evaluations each incorporate several components: The components of formative evaluation are (a) a needs assessment to determine the needs of the proposed participants and the methods for meeting those needs, (b) an evaluability assessment to determine if an evaluation of the program’s effectiveness is possible and practical, (c) a structured evaluation to define the program, its participants, and potential outcomes, (d) an implementation evaluation to monitor the fidelity of the program, and (e) a process evaluation to evaluate how the program was delivered. The components of a summative evaluation are (a) an outcome evaluation to determine if the program achieved its stated goals, (b) an impact evaluation to identify the intended and unintended effects of the program on the organization, (c) a cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit analysis to assess program outcomes in terms of costs and benefits, (d) a secondary analysis to identify any new questions or methods not previously addressed, and (e) a meta-analysis to integrate all outcome estimates and derive a summary evaluation.

The *Dessinger-Moseley full-scope evaluation model* (Dessinger & Moseley, 2010) expands Scriven’s dichotomy by distinguishing between four types of evaluation: (a) *Formative evaluation* is conducted during the development of a training program to determine what changes are needed for the program to achieve its goals. It may include having experts review the content of each component of the program to determine if it adequately addresses program goals and administering measures of attitudes and learning to a sample of trainees after each component is delivered. (b) *Summative evaluation* is conducted soon after the entire training program has been delivered to determine its immediate effects. It involves administering measures that assess trainees’ reactions to training and the effectiveness of training for meeting its goals. (c) *Confirmative evaluation* is conducted at a later time to evaluate the long-term effects of training and involves administering measures similar to those administered as part of the summative evaluation. (d) *Meta-evaluation* is an ongoing process that’s conducted during and after the formative, summative, and confirmative evaluations for the purpose of assessing their reliability and validity.
Finally, *Kirkpatrick’s evaluation model* (1998) distinguishes between four levels of training program evaluation that are arranged in order from least to most informative: (a) *Reaction criteria* assess the trainees’ impressions of the training. (b) *Learning criteria* assess how well trainees acquired the information and skills presented during training. (c) *Behavior criteria* evaluate the degree to which trainees’ job performance improved as a result of training. (d) *Results criteria* assess the effects of training on return-on-investment (ROI), customer satisfaction, and other organizational outcomes. Results criteria are considered to be most useful, but they’re difficult to assess because it’s often not possible to determine whether changes in outcomes are due to training or other factors.