# Test Score Interpretation


**Norm- and Criterion-Referenced Scores:** To facilitate the interpretation of test scores, raw scores are often converted to norm- or criterion-referenced scores.

1. **Norm-Referenced Scores:** Test standardization involves developing uniform administration and scoring procedures for the test and often includes establishing norms by administering the test to a large sample of examinees who are representative of the individuals for whom the test is designed. Norm-referenced scores indicate how well an examinee did on the test compared to how well individuals in the standardization sample (or other relevant reference group) did. The primary objective when using norm-referenced scores is “to make distinctions among individuals or groups in terms of the ability or trait assessed by a test” (Urbina, 2014, p. 212). Included in this category are percentile ranks and standard scores.

(a) **Percentile Ranks:** A percentile rank indicates the percentage of examinees in the reference group who scored at or below the score obtained by an examinee. For example, if an examinee’s raw score on a test is 75 and its percentile rank equivalent is 82, this means that 82% of examinees in the reference group obtained a raw score of 75 or lower.

The conversion of raw scores to percentile ranks is a nonlinear transformation since the percentile rank distribution is always rectangular (flat) regardless of the shape of the distribution of raw scores. This occurs because 1% of the scores are assigned to each percentile rank: The highest 1% of raw scores are converted to a percentile rank of 100, the next highest 1% to a percentile rank of 99, etc. 

(b) **Standard Scores:**  Standard scores indicate how well an examinee did on a test in terms of standard deviations from the mean score obtained by the reference group and include z-scores, T-scores, IQ scores, and stanines. Converting raw scores to standard scores is a linear transformation because the standard score distribution has the same shape as the raw score distribution. However, a nonlinear transformation can be used to normalize a distribution of standard scores (to change the distribution to a normal distribution), but this is ordinarily done only when the distribution of raw scores approximates a normal distribution (Urbina, 2014). 

(1) The *z-score* distribution has a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.0, and a z-score expresses an examinee’s score directly in terms of standard deviations from the mean. When an examinee’s raw score is equivalent to a z-score of -1.0, for example, this means that the examinee’s raw score is one standard deviation below the mean obtained by the reference group. An examinee’s raw score is transformed to a z-score by subtracting the mean (M) of the raw score distribution from the examinee’s raw score (X) and dividing the result by the standard deviation (SD): i.e., z = (X – M)/SD. For instance, if an examinee obtains a score of 110 on a test that has a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 5, the examinee’s z-score is +2.0: (110 – 100)/5 = +2.0. 
(2) *T-scores* have a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10. When an examinee’s raw score is equivalent to a T-score of 40, this means that his/her raw score is one standard deviation below the mean.

(3) Full-scale *IQ scores* on the SB-5 and Wechsler tests have a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15. When an examinee obtains an IQ score of 85 on one of these tests, this means that his/her score is one standard deviation below the mean.

(4) *Stanines* have a mean of 5 and standard deviation of 2 and range from 1 to 9. With the exception of the two extreme scores (1 and 9), each stanine represents one-half of a standard deviation.  For example, a stanine of 5 includes the raw scores obtained by the reference group that range from .25 standard deviations below to .25 standard deviations above the mean.
For the exam, you want to know the equivalents for the different standard scores (e.g., that a T-score of 60 is equivalent to a z-score of +1.0) as well as their percentile rank (PR) equivalents in a normal distribution. You’ll be able to answer questions about percentile rank equivalents if you memorize that, in a normal distribution, a PR of 2 is equivalent to -2 SD (standard deviations), a PR of 16 is equivalent to -1 SD, a PR of 84 is equivalent to +1 SD, and a PR of 98 is equivalent to +2 SD.

2. **Criterion-Referenced Scores:** The primary objective when using criterion-referenced scores is “to evaluate a person’s or a group’s degree of competence or mastery of a skill or knowledge domain in terms of a preestablished standard of performance” (Urbina, 2014, p. 121). Included in this category are percentage scores and expectancy tables.

(a) **Percentage Scores:** Percentage scores indicate the percentage of test items or test content that examinees answered correctly. For instance, an examinee who answers 75 of 150 test items correctly would obtain a percentage score of 50%. When percentage scores are used to make decisions about examinees, a cutoff score is often set. As an example, when the purpose of testing is to distinguish between people who have and have not mastered the content domain covered by the test, a cutoff score is set (e.g., 80% correct) and examinees who score at or above the cutoff are identified as having achieved mastery. 

(b) **Expectancy Tables:** Expectancy tables provide information on an examinee’s expected score on another measure based on his/her obtained test score. In a job hiring situation, the data needed to construct an expectancy table might be obtained from a concurrent validity study that involved administering the selection test (the predictor) and job performance measure (the criterion) to a sample of current employees. The expectancy table is then used to predict a job applicant’s future criterion score based on his/her obtained predictor score. In contrast to a regression equation, which is used to predict a single criterion score from an obtained predictor score, an expectancy table indicates, for different predictor scores, the percent of individuals in the reference group (e.g., employees in the validity study) who obtained different criterion scores. For example, an expectancy table might show that 10% of employees who obtained a selection test score between 90 and 100 received below average job performance scores, 35% received average scores, and 55% received above average scores.

**Cutoff Scores, Ranking, and Banding:** There are several ways to use test scores to assist with hiring and other selection decisions. When using a *cutoff score*, candidates who score at or above the cutoff score are selected. One method for setting a cutoff score is to link predictor (test) scores to scores on a criterion (e.g., measure of job performance) and use the predictor score associated with the lowest acceptable criterion score as the cutoff. When using *ranking*,  candidates are ranked from highest to lowest based on their test scores and candidates are selected from the top down until the desired number of candidates have been chosen. Finally, when using *banding*, test scores are grouped into bands (score ranges) that are determined by the test’s standard error of measurement, and scores within each band are considered equivalent. The use of banding is based on the assumption that small differences in test scores are due to the unreliability of the test. When using this method, all candidates with scores in the band containing the highest scores are considered for selection before those with scores in the band containing the next highest scores. Advocates of banding argue that it helps reduce adverse impact because bands may include members of minority groups that tend to receive lower test scores and candidates within a band are then selected on the basis of experience, interpersonal skills, or other factors that are not related to their group membership (Campion et al., 2001).
