# Cross-Cultural Issues – Terms and Concepts


**Terms and Concepts:** The following are terms and concepts related to cross-cultural psychology that you want to be familiar with for the EPPP:

1. **Worldview:** As described by Sue, worldview “affects how we perceive and evaluate situations and how we derive appropriate actions based on our appraisal” (2006, p. 64). He proposes that worldview is affected by culture and can be described in terms of two dimensions: locus of control and locus of responsibility: (a) People with an *internal locus of control and internal locus of responsibility* (IC-IR) believe they are in control of their own outcomes and are responsible for their own successes and failures. (b) People with an *internal locus of control and external locus of responsibility* (IC-ER) believe they could determine their own outcomes if given the chance but that others are responsible for keeping them from doing so. (c) People with an *external locus of control and external locus of responsibility* (EC-ER) believe they have little or no control over their outcomes and are not responsible for them. (d) People with an *external locus of control and internal locus of responsibility* (EC-IR) believe they have little control over their outcomes but tend to take responsibility for their own failures.

According to Sue and his colleagues, the IC-IR worldview is characteristic of mainstream American culture, while the other three are characteristic of some minority cultures. They also propose that a difference in a therapist’s and client’s worldviews can affect the therapeutic relationship. For example, clients who have an IC-ER worldview are likely to be the most challenging for a White therapist who has an IC-IR worldview because these clients are likely to view the therapist and therapy as sources of oppression and to be reluctant to self-disclose, to want take an active role in therapy, and “to seek action and accountability from a more privileged therapist” (2019, p. 115). 

2. **Acculturation:** According to Berry (1990), when members of a minority group are in contact with a majority group, they can adopt one of four acculturation strategies that represent different combinations of retention/rejection of their own minority culture and the majority culture: (a) People who adopt an *integration strategy* retain their own minority culture and adopt the majority culture. (b) People who adopt an *assimilation strategy* reject their own minority culture and adopt the majority culture. (c) People who adopt a *separation strategy* retain their own minority culture and reject the majority culture. (d) People who adopt a *marginalization strategy* reject their own minority culture and the majority culture. Berry has related the acculturation strategies to *acculturative stress*, which he defines as “a stress reaction in response to life events that are rooted in the experience of  acculturation” (2005, p. 708). Acculturative stress occurs when individuals are facing significant problems related to acculturation that cannot be easily or quickly resolved. According to Berry, people who adopt an integration strategy experience the least acculturative stress, while those who adopt a marginalization strategy experience the most acculturative stress.

Cultural distance and cultural fit are two factors that affect the acculturation process. Both terms have been applied primarily to immigrants, with immigrants being the minority and the host society being the majority (e.g., Ward et al., 2001). *Cultural distance* refers to differences in the culture of an immigrant’s home country and the culture of the host country in terms of language, core values and beliefs, government, legal system, and other basic cultural characteristics. A large cultural distance is associated with an increased likelihood that immigrants will experience acculturative stress and difficulty adapting to the host country. *Cultural fit* refers to the degree to which an immigrant’s personality and other personal attributes are similar to the cultural values and norms of the host country. A good cultural fit makes it easier for an immigrant to adapt to the host country.

3. **Healthy Cultural Paranoia:** Ridley (2005) proposed that an ethnic minority client’s unwillingness to disclose personal information to a White therapist may be due to one of two types of paranoia: *Functional paranoia* is an unhealthy psychological condition that involves pervasive suspicion and distrust. An ethnic minority client with functional paranoia is unwilling to disclose personal information to an ethnic minority or White therapist. In contrast, *healthy cultural paranoia* also involves suspicion and distrust, but it’s a normal reaction to prejudice and discrimination. An ethnic minority client with healthy cultural paranoia is willing to self-disclose to an ethnic minority therapist but unwilling to self-disclose to a White therapist unless certain conditions are met – i.e., the therapist discusses the meaning of the cultural paranoia with the client and encourages the client to distinguish between when it is and is not safe to self-disclose.  

4. **Racial Microaggressions:** Sue et al. (2007) define racial microaggressions as “brief and commonplace daily verbal, behavioral, or environmental indignities, whether intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile, derogatory, or negative racial slights and insults toward people of color” (p. 271). They also distinguish between three types of microaggression: (a) *Microassaults* are explicit racial derogations that are usually intentional and meant to hurt the intended victim. They include name-calling and explicit discriminatory acts and are most similar to what is referred to as “old-fashioned” racism. (b) *Microinsults* are verbal and nonverbal messages that are insensitive to or demean the person’s racial or ethnic background or identity. They include pathologizing the culture and communication styles of people of color, assigning a level of intelligence to a person of color on the basis of the person’s race (“ascription of intelligence”), and assuming that a person of color is dangerous or deviant in some way based on the person’s race. Implying that an African American employee was hired only because of affirmative action is a microinsult. (c) Microinvalidations are “communications that exclude, negate, or nullify the psychological thoughts, feelings, or experiential reality of a person of color” (p. 274). They include assuming that members of racial/ethnic minority groups are foreigners, unwillingness to acknowledge race (color blindness), and asserting that race has no effect on a person’s success or other life outcomes (myth of meritocracy). Assuming that an Asian American student was not born in the United States and complimenting him on his “good English” is a microinvalidation.

5. **Internalized Racism and Colorism:** *Internalized racism* is also known as internalized racial oppression and occurs when a person accepts society’s negative beliefs and stereotypes related to his or her own racial group. *Colorism* is a form of internalized racism and is also known as color consciousness. It refers to “discrimination within a racial group based primarily on skin hue or color and may also include other physical characteristics such as hair texture and eye color .... [In the United States and some other countries, this involves] preferences for lighter skin over darker skin within a community of color” (Lomotey, 2010, p. 529). The use of skin-lightening products by people of color is a manifestation of colorism.

6. **White Privilege:** As described by Peggy McIntosh (1998), white privilege consists of unearned benefits that are conferred upon White individuals based solely on their skin color and are inaccessible to racial/ethnic minorities. McIntosh proposes that most White people are unaware of their race-related privileges because they are maintained by denial, and she provides several examples of privileges that Whites tend to take for granted: For example, they can usually go shopping without being followed or harassed by store clerks or security staff, can turn on the television and see people of their race widely represented, can arrange to protect their children most of the time from people who might not like them, and are never called upon to speak for members of their racial group. Neville, Worthington, and Spanierman (2001) point out that White privilege occurs at both macro and micro levels: At the macro level, White privilege is systemic and consists of the benefits, rights, and immunities that Whites have within institutions – for example, more favorable educational opportunities and housing conditions, better health care, and higher salaries. At the micro level, White privilege is primarily intrapsychic and interpersonal and includes a sense of entitlement and social validation of Whiteness.  

Several authors have proposed that White privilege not only has substantial negative economic, political, and social costs for racial/ethnic minorities but also some negative consequences for Whites. Spanierman et al. (2006), for instance, state that these consequences include distorted beliefs about race and racism, limited exposure to people of different races and ethnicity, and irrational fear of people of different races and ethnicity. It has also been pointed out that unacknowledged White privilege can interfere with a White therapist’s ability to develop multicultural counseling competencies (e.g., Neville, Worthington, & Spanierman, 2001).

7. **Etic vs. Emic Perspective:** Psychologists can adopt an emic or etic perspective when working with clients from different cultural backgrounds. A psychologist who has an *emic perspecti*ve believes that behavior is affected by culture and, as a result, psychological theories and interventions that apply to members of one culture may not apply to members of other cultures. In contrast, a psychologist who has an *etic perspective* believes that behavior is similar across cultures and that the same psychological theories and interventions are appropriate for everyone, regardless of their cultural background. 

8. **Autoplastic vs. Alloplastic Interventions:**  *Autoplastic interventions* focus on making changes in the client so that he or she can successfully adapt to the environment. Strategies aimed at helping a client gain insight into his or her problems or change his or her behavior are autoplastic interventions. *Alloplastic interventions* focus on altering the environment or situation to fit the client’s needs, desires, or other attributes. Removing oneself from a stressful situation – for example, by changing jobs – is an alloplastic intervention.

9. **Cultural Encapsulation:** Wrenn (1962) coined the term “cultural encapsulation” to explain the inability of some mental health professionals to work effectively with members of different cultural backgrounds. As described by Wrenn, culturally encapsulated mental health professionals are insensitive to cultural differences and believe that their own cultural assumptions about what constitutes mental health or normality applies to people from all cultural backgrounds. 

10. **Tight vs. Loose Cultures:** Cultural tightness-looseness refers to the strength of a culture’s social norms and tolerance for deviant behaviors: Tight cultures have strong social norms and low tolerance for deviant behaviors; loose cultures have weak social norms and high tolerance for deviant behaviors. According to Gelfand and her colleagues (Gelfand, 2012; Harrington & Gelfand, 2014), tightness-looseness is related to the ecological and human-made challenges that nations and states have historically encountered.  For example, nations and states with a history of high population density, greater vulnerability to natural disasters and disease, and scarcity of resources are likely to become tight because they need strong norms and punishments for deviant behaviors to ensure their survival, while nations and states without these challenges survive with weaker norms and acceptance of deviant behaviors. 

Gelfand and her colleagues have categorized nations and states in the United States in terms of their degree of tightness and looseness based on data collected in 33 nations and 50 states. For example, with regard to nations, these investigators classified Pakistan, Malaysia, and India as the three “tightest” countries and Estonia, Hungary, and Israel as the three “loosest” countries. With regard to states, Mississippi, Alabama, and Arkansas were classified as the three “tightest” states, while California, Oregon, and Washington were classified as the three “loosest” states. 

Gelfand, Nishii, and Raver (2006) have identified several ways that individuals in tight and loose cultures differ. For example, in tight cultures, there is greater conformity to social norms, a tendency to engage in risk avoidance behaviors, and a preference for stability. In loose cultures, there is greater willingness to act in ways that deviate from social norms and engage in risk-taking and innovative behaviors and a greater openness to change. In addition, Harrington and Gelfand (2014) found that individuals living in tight states have higher levels of conscientiousness and lower levels of openness to experience than do individuals living in loose states, while the opposite is true for individuals living in loose states.

11. **Integration Paradox:** There is evidence that, contrary to what might be expected, higher-status immigrants (i.e., those who are highly educated and economically successful) are more likely than lower-status immigrants to report experiencing discrimination and disrespect and, as a result, are less likely to identify with and have positive attitudes toward mainstream society (Verkuyten, 2016). There are several explanations for this *integration paradox* (e.g., Schaeffer & Kas, 2023): One explanation is that, because higher-status immigrants have greater access to mainstream society at school, at work, and in their communities, they are more likely to encounter discrimination. Another explanation is that, because of their higher levels of education, higher-status immigrants have more sophisticated cognitive abilities and, consequently, are more aware of discrimination and more likely to interpret their experiences in terms of discrimination. [Note that the integration paradox is sometimes confused with the unrelated *immigrant paradox*, which refers to the observation that, for some immigrant groups, recent immigrants tend to have better physical health, mental health, and educational outcomes compared to more established immigrants and nonimmigrants (e.g., Gandhi et al., 2022).]

12. **High- vs. Low-Context Communication:** Hall (1976) distinguished between two communication styles: *High-context communication* relies heavily on group understanding, nonverbal messages, and the context in which the communication occurs and is characteristic of several cultural minority groups. In contrast, *low-context communication* relies on the verbal message, is independent of the context, and is characteristic of the White (mainstream) culture. As noted by Sue (2006), problems can arise in therapy when the therapist and client have different communication styles. For example, “the fact that African Americans may communicate more by HC [high context] cues has led many to characterize them as nonverbal, inarticulate, [and] unintelligent” (p. 164).

13. **Diagnostic Overshadowing:** The term “diagnostic overshadowing” was initially used to describe the tendency of mental health professionals to attribute all of the problems of people who have received a diagnosis of intellectual disability to that diagnosis and overlook other problems (Reiss, Levitan, & Szyszko, 1982). Since then, the term has been applied to other client characteristics. For instance, Sue and Sue (2012) note that therapists are exhibiting diagnostic overshadowing when they assume that the presenting problems of gay clients are due to the clients’ sexual orientation without considering other explanations.

14. **Own-Race Bias:** The own-race bias (ORB) is also known as the other-race effect and cross-race effect and refers to the tendency of people to more accurately perceive and identify the faces of individuals of their own race than the faces of individuals of other races. The research has found that ORB is prevalent among all racial groups, although there is some evidence that, in America, it is somewhat more prevalent among White than Black individuals (e.g., Anthony et al., 1992). A commonly cited explanation for ORB is that people are better able to recognize differences among individuals of their own race because they have had the most exposure to those individuals. ORB has some important implications. For example, with regard to eyewitness testimony, the studies have found that cross-race identifications produce more misidentifications (“false alarms”) than own-race identifications do (e.g., Meissner et al., 2005). Note that researchers have identified similar own-age and own-gender biases (e.g., Wright & Stroud, 2002; Wright & Sladden, 2003).

15. **Minority Stress Theory:** Minority stress theory was developed by Meyer (2003) to explain the increased risk for mental health problems among sexual-minority individuals. It proposes that sexual-minority individuals experience chronic stressors related to their stigmatization that increase their vulnerability to mental health problems. The theory also distinguishes between proximal and distal minority stress processes: Proximal processes occur within the person and include concealment, fear of rejection, and internalized heterosexism; distal processes are external to the person and include verbal and physical harassment, prejudice, and discrimination. The theory has also been applied to other stigmatized minority groups and to physical health and other outcomes. 

16. **Credibility and Gift Giving:** Sue and Zane (2009) propose that credibility and gift giving are important when working with Asian American and other non-Western clients. *Credibility* refers to the client’s perception of the therapist as trustworthy and is determined by the therapist’s ascribed and achieved status: Ascribed status is the position or role assigned to the therapist by the client’s culture. For example, age and gender are characteristics that contribute to a therapist’s credibility in some cultures. Achieved status is the therapist’s expertise – e.g., the therapist’s experience working with members of the client’s culture. *Gift giving* refers to the direct benefits that a client perceives he/she receives from therapy. These include providing the client with reassurance and a sense of hope, normalizing the client’s feelings, and using interventions that reduce the client’s depression or anxiety. Sue and Zane note that direct benefits must be given as soon as possible in therapy to help establish achieved credibility and reduce premature termination from therapy by demonstrating the relationship between therapy and the alleviation of the client’s problems.

17. **Evidence-Based Practice and Culturally Adapted Interventions:** As defined by the American Psychological Association, *evidence-based practice in psychology* (EBPP) “is the integration of the best available research with clinical expertise in the context of patient characteristics, culture, and preferences” (2006, p. 273). The term “evidence-based practice” is often used interchangeably with the terms “evidence-based interventions” and “evidence-based treatments.” However, some experts use evidence-based practice as a more general term and evidence-based interventions and treatments to refer to “interventions for which there is consistent scientific evidence showing that they improve client outcomes” (Drake et al., 2001, p. 180). Also, the terms “evidence-based treatments” and “evidence-based interventions” are sometimes used interchangeably with the term “empirically supported treatments,” but the latter term is often used to refer only to treatments that have been found to be effective by scientific research that meets certain criteria – for example, multiple group studies that found the treatment to be superior to no-treatment or to be equivalent or superior to an established treatment.  

*Culturally adapted interventions* involve “the systematic modification of an evidence-based treatment (EBT) or intervention protocol to consider language, culture, and context in such a way that it is compatible with the client’s cultural patterns, meaning, and values” (Bernal, Jimenez-Chafey, & Rodriguez, 2009, p. 362). Adaptations may include incorporating content that’s culturally appropriate and relevant (e.g., issues related acculturation, racism, and religion and spirituality) and/or altering the format and delivery of treatment so that it’s culturally compatible (e.g., delivering treatment in the client’s native language, adopting a culturally compatible interpersonal style, and including indigenous healers in the delivery of treatment).

Note that the adaptation of EBTs has created a “fidelity-adaptation dilemma” that requires psychotherapists to determine to what degree they will adopt “the standardized nomothetic scientific top-down approach that demands fidelity in its implementation and the idiographic casewise bottom-up approach that demands sensitivity and responsiveness to each person's unique needs” (Castro, Barrera, & Steiker, 2010, p. 214). Based on their review of the research, Sue, Zane, Nagayama Hall, and Berger conclude that “the preponderance of evidence shows that culturally adapted interventions provide benefit to intervention outcomes … [but] this added value is more apparent in the research on adults than on children and youths” (2009, p. 541). In addition, the studies have found (a) that adaptations are more effective when they involve adding features to an intervention than when they involve replacing a component of an intervention (Blakely et al., 1987), and (b) that culturally adapted interventions are most beneficial for clients who have the greatest need for them – for example, clients who are not fluent in English and clients with low levels of acculturation (Griner & Smith, 2006).  

**Culturally Competent Psychotherapy:** A culturally competent psychotherapist has the cultural awareness, knowledge, and skills necessary to provide effective professional services to members of diverse populations (Sue & Torino, 2005). Guidelines for working with members of several culturally diverse groups are provided below (Paniagua, 2014; Sue & Sue, 2015). Keep in mind that an essential contributor to cultural competence is being aware of relevant guidelines while being careful not to overgeneralize them.  

1. **African Americans:** When working with African American clients, therapists should (a) consider the client’s cultural identity, level of acculturation, and worldview; (b) keep in mind that racism and other environmental factors may be contributors to the client’s presenting problems; (c) be aware that the client’s extended kinship network is likely to include nuclear and extended family members, friends, and members of his/her church and community; (d) know that roles within African American families are often flexible and that male-female relationships tend to be egalitarian; and (e) empower the client by, for example, helping the client acquire the problem-solving and decision-making skills he/she needs to control of his/her own life. With regard to interventions, African American clients usually prefer an egalitarian therapist-client relationship and a time-limited, problem-solving approach. Boyd-Franklin (2003) recommends using a multisystems approach, which involves intervening in numerous systems and at multiple levels that include the individual, his/her immediate and extended family, nonblood relatives and friends, church and community services, and social service agencies.

2. **American Indians:** When working with American Indian clients, therapists should (a) consider the client’s cultural identity, level of acculturation, and worldview; (b) identify possible environmental contributors (e.g., discrimination, poverty, acculturation conflicts) to the client’s presenting problems; (c) be aware that American Indians often adhere to a collateral social system that incorporates the family, community, and tribe; (d) recognize that cooperation, sharing, and generosity are important cultural values and that the interests of the family and tribe take priority over the interests of the individual; (e) be aware that American Indians are likely to regard wellness as depending on the harmony of mind, body, and spirit and illness as the result of disharmony; (f) keep in mind that American Indians tend to place more emphasis on nonverbal than verbal communication, consider listening to be more important than talking, and view direct eye contact as a sign of disrespect and a firm handshake as a sign of aggression; and (g) foster a collaborative therapeutic relationship and build trust by demonstrating familiarity with and respect for the client’s culture and admitting any lack of knowledge. A collaborative, problem-solving, client-centered approach that avoids highly directive techniques and incorporates American Indian values and traditional healers is usually preferred. LaFromboise, Trimble, and Mohatt (1990) recommend using network therapy, which helps empower clients to cope with life stresses by mobilizing relatives, friends, and tribal members to provide support and encouragement.  

3. **Hispanic/Latino Americans:** When working with Hispanic/Latino American clients, therapists should (a) consider the client’s cultural identity, level of acculturation, and worldview; (b) identify possible environmental contributors (e.g., discrimination, poverty, acculturation conflicts) to the client’s presenting problems; (c) determine the client’s beliefs about the nature of his/her presenting problems and be aware that Hispanic Americans often express psychological symptoms as somatic complaints; (d) consider how a client’s religious and spiritual beliefs might inform assessment, diagnosis, and treatment decisions; (e) keep in mind that Hispanic/Latino Americans tend to emphasize family welfare over individual welfare; (f) be aware that Hispanic/Latino American families may be patriarchal and stress *machismo* (male dominance) and *marianismo* (female submissiveness); and (g) adopt a formal style (*formalismo*) in the initial therapy session but a more personal style (*personalismo*) in subsequent sessions. With regard to interventions, Hispanic/Latino American clients are likely to prefer cognitive-behavior therapy, solution-focused therapy, family therapy, and group therapy. Therapy may be most effective when it incorporates culturally congruent techniques such as cuento therapy (the use of folktales to present models of adaptive behavior) and dichos (the use of proverbs and idiomatic expressions to help clients express their feelings).

4. **Asian Americans:** When working with Asian American clients, therapists should (a) consider the client’s cultural identity, level of acculturation, and worldview; (b) identify environmental factors that may be contributors to the client’s presenting problems; (c) be aware that differences in acculturation within families may be a source of conflict; (d) determine the client’s beliefs about the contributors to his or her presenting problems and be aware that Asian Americans often have a holistic view of mind and body and express psychological problems as somatic symptoms; (e) be aware that Asian American families tend to be hierarchical and patriarchal, adhere to traditional gender roles, and emphasize family needs over individual needs; (f) keep in mind that a fear of losing face and shame are powerful motivators for Asian Americans and may affect their willingness to discuss personal problems and express emotions; (g) maintain a formal style during the course of therapy; and (h) be aware that, for Asian American clients, periods of silence and avoidance of eye contact are expressions of respect and politeness. With regard to treatment, Asian Americans are likely to prefer cognitive-behavior therapy and other brief structured goal-oriented, problem-focused approaches that focus more on the family than the individual. They are also likely to expect the therapist to be a knowledgeable expert who gives advice and suggests specific courses of action while also encouraging their participation in identifying goals and solutions to their problems.  

5. **Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer/Questioning (LGBTQ) Clients:** LGBTQ men and women are more than twice as likely as heterosexual men and women to have mental disorders during their lives, especially anxiety, depression, and substance misuse, and there is evidence that bisexual individuals have more mental health problems than do gay men and lesbian women (e.g., Kates, Ranji, Beamesderfer, Salganicoff, & Dawson, 2016). With regard to utilization rates, the research has found that sexual minority individuals utilize mental health services at higher rates than do heterosexual individuals and that gender differences vary: Heterosexual women have higher utilization rates than heterosexual men do, but gay men have higher rates than lesbian women do and bisexual men and women have similar rates (Platt, Wolf, & Scheitle, 2018). There is also evidence that identifying as a sexual minority is associated with an increased risk for premature termination from therapy (Anderson, Bautista, & Hope, 2019). 

With regard to the optimal type of psychotherapy, experts stress the importance of combining evidence-based practices with culturally competent services. For LGBTQ clients, this means providing affirmative therapy, which is characterized by “the integration of knowledge and awareness by the therapist of the unique development and cultural aspects of LGBT[Q] individuals, the therapist’s own self-knowledge, and the translation of this knowledge and awareness into effective and helpful therapy skills at all stages of the therapeutic process” (Perez, 2007, p. 408). For example, when using cognitive-behavior therapy with LGBTQ clients who have received a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, it is important to distinguish maladaptive thoughts from thoughts that reflect a normal response to the stigmatization clients have experienced because of their sexual or gender orientations. 

Sexual identity milestones are an important consideration when working with LGBTQ clients. Research has confirmed that milestones usually emerge in the same order but that the ages at which they occur are affected by age cohort, with younger cohorts experiencing milestones at earlier ages. For example, Bishop and colleagues (2020) reported the results of the Generations Study, which examined the health and well-being of LGB individuals representing three age cohorts: 18 to 26, 32 to 43, and 50 to 60. Included in this study were questions about participants’ ages at which they first experienced five sexual identity milestones: In order of their occurrence, these milestones are awareness of same-sex attraction; self-identification as lesbian, gay, or bisexual; same-sex sexual behavior; disclosure as a sexual minority to a straight friend; and disclosure as a sexual minority to a family member. Consistent with previous research, Bishop et al. found that members of the younger cohort experienced all milestones at the earliest ages followed by, in order, members of the middle cohort and members of the older cohort. Finally, several researchers have studied the effects of sexual identity milestones on the mental health of LGB individuals. For example, with regard to disclosure of sexual identity to others (“coming out”), Jordan and Deluty’s (1998) survey of lesbian women found that, the greater the extent of disclosure to others, the greater the women’s self-esteem and positive affectivity and the lower their anxiety. More recently, Pachankis, Cochran, and Mays (2015)  found gender differences in the effects of disclosure for respondents to the California Quality of Life survey: Compared to lesbian women who reported they had not disclosed their sexual orientation to another person, those who said they had recently disclosed were significantly less likely to report having major depressive disorder. In contrast, compared to gay men who reported they had not disclosed, those who said they had recently disclosed were significantly more likely to report having major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.

6. **Older Adult Clients:** With the exception of neurocognitive disorder, the rates of mental disorders are lower among older adults than their younger and middle-aged counterparts (Kessler et al., 2005). However, many older adults experience mental health problems (with anxiety and depression being most common), and their symptoms may differ from those of younger adults. For example, with regard to depression, older adults are more likely to complain about physical and cognitive symptoms than emotional distress (e.g., to complain of frequent headaches, increased pain, changes in appetite, tiredness, low energy, and impaired memory and concentration rather than sadness) and to report irritability, insomnia, weight loss, and other symptoms associated with anxiety (Guccione, Wong, & Avers, 2012). With regard to treatment, the research has generally found that the effects of psychotherapy are comparable for older and younger adults but that older adults may respond more slowly to therapy and benefit most when treatment is tailored to their cognitive, sensory, and physical needs.

General guidelines for working with older adults are provided in APA’s (2014) *Guidelines for Psychological Practice with Older Adults*. They include the following: (a) Consider how your own attitudes and beliefs about aging might impact your assessment and treatment of older adults. For example, be aware that many stereotypes of older adults are inaccurate and can affect clinical decisions. (b) Be aware that “the heterogeneity among older adults surpasses that seen in other age groups” (p. 40), and recognize how gender, age, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, and other factors may affect the experience and expression of psychological problems of older adults. (c) Be familiar with normal biological changes associated with increasing age (e.g., changes in sensory acuity and cognitive functioning) and be able to distinguish between normative changes and changes due to physical illness or medications. (d) Be aware that older adults respond favorably to a variety of types of psychotherapy but that some interventions have been found to be particularly effective for older adults with certain disorders (e.g., cognitive-behavior therapy and reminiscence therapy for depression). (e) Acquire the knowledge and skills needed to make culturally sensitive adaptations to interventions that increase their effectiveness for older adults. This may include modifying an intervention’s process and/or content – for example, slowing the pace of therapy by shortening the length of sessions, increasing the number of sessions, and/or decreasing the frequency of sessions; accommodating hearing loss by reducing ambient noise; and addressing physical illness, grief, cognitive decline, and other problems that are experienced more often by older than younger adults.

7. **Assessment** Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children, Second Edition (KABC-II) and Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM) are the two assessments that would be used when trying to lower cultural bias and not have cognitive assessment affected by English proficiency or cultural learning.

