# Interventions Based on Classical Conditioning



Interventions based on classical conditioning decrease or eliminate an undesirable behavior using extinction or counterconditioning.
**Interventions That Use Extinction:** Interventions that use classical extinction to alter a behavior include exposure with response prevention, cue exposure therapy, implosive therapy, and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing.

1. **Exposure with Response Prevention:**  Exposure with response prevention uses classical extinction to eliminate an anxiety response and is based on two assumptions. The first assumption is that anxiety-arousing stimuli that do not ordinarily elicit anxiety (e.g., elevators, crowds, white rats) become conditioned stimuli and begin to elicit anxiety because, at some time in the past, they were paired with an unconditioned stimulus that naturally elicited anxiety. The second assumption is that the conditioned fear response never extinguishes because the person avoids the conditioned stimulus in order to avoid experiencing fear. As an example, a person who has a fear of elevators may have acquired this fear because he was in an elevator when there was an earthquake that automatically elicited a fear response. In this situation, the elevator was the CS and the earthquake was the US and, as a result of the pairing of the CS and US and subsequent stimulus generalization, the person is now afraid of all elevators. In this situation, the person always takes the stairs instead of the elevator to avoid feeling fear, which deprives him of opportunities for extinguishing his conditioned fear response. When using exposure with response prevention, the client is exposed to the feared (conditioned) stimulus while preventing the client from making his/her usual avoidance response. As a result, the conditioned response is extinguished.

Exposure with response prevention can be conducted in vivo (in real life settings), in virtual reality, or in imagination, and it can take the form of flooding or graded exposure:  *Flooding* involves sustained exposure to stimuli that elicit the most intense levels of anxiety during all exposure sessions, while *graded exposure* (also known as graduated exposure) involves progressive exposure to anxiety-arousing stimuli, beginning with the least anxiety-arousing stimulus and gradually progressing to stimuli that produce increasingly greater levels of anxiety. Although flooding can be effective (especially for treating agoraphobia), graded exposure is more acceptable to clients who resist experiencing high levels of anxiety. Also, to be effective, each exposure session should not end until the client has experienced a substantial decrease in anxiety (Clark & Beck, 2010). 

Finally, for individuals with anxiety disorders, conditioned inhibition (described in the section on classical conditioning) can lead to the development of safety behaviors that act as conditioned inhibitors and signal that anxiety or fear will <u>not</u> occur in anxiety-arousing situations. For example, carrying a water bottle or cell phone or being accompanied by a family member or friend may be safety behaviors for a person with a specific phobia, panic disorder, or other anxiety disorder. Note that there are differing opinions on the effects of safety behaviors on the outcomes of exposure with response prevention: Some investigators argue that safety behaviors hinder its effectiveness for several reasons. For instance, patients may attribute the non-occurrence of an anxiety response to safety behaviors rather than to the treatment and, therefore, continue to be unwilling to face anxiety-arousing situations without engaging in safety behaviors (e.g., Lovibond et al., 2009). However, others suggest that safety behaviors can be helpful, especially early in treatment, by making exposure less threatening and more tolerable to patients (e.g., Helbig-Lang & Petermann, 2010).

2. **Cue Exposure Therapy:** Cue exposure therapy (CET) is a type of exposure with response prevention that’s used to treat substance use disorders. It involves exposing a client to cues (conditioned stimuli) associated with a substance while prohibiting him/her from using the substance. Doing so weakens the strength of the relationship between the cues and substance use, apparently as the result of extinction or habituation (Sher, Talley, Littlefield, & Martinez, 2011). Cues include internal and external triggers for substance use such as craving for the substance, interpersonal conflicts, and the sight of the substance. CET is often effective when used alone, but there’s evidence that its effectiveness increases when it’s combined with training in coping strategies to use when faced with cues, such as reminding oneself about the negative consequences of substance use and engaging in alternative activities (Spiegler, 2015).

3. **Implosive Therapy:** Implosive therapy (Stampfl & Levis, 1967) is a type of exposure that’s always conducted in imagination and incorporates psychodynamic elements. When using implosive therapy, the therapist encourages the client to exaggerate his/her image of the feared object or event in order to elicit a high level of anxiety and embellishes the scene being imagined by the client with psychodynamic conflicts that are believed to underlie the client’s anxiety (e.g., conflicts related to sexuality, hostility, or rejection).  

4. **Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR):** EMDR was originally developed as an intervention for PTSD (Shapiro, 2001; Shapiro & Maxfield, 2002) but is now also used to treat phobias and several other disorders. It is based on Shapiro’s adaptive information processing (AIP) model, which proposes (a) that pathology results when traumatic experiences are not fully processed or are processed in a maladaptive way by the brain’s information processing system and (b) that EMDR facilitates information processing, resulting in an adaptive resolution of traumatic memories. EMDR combines rapid eye movements, exposure to trauma-related imagery, exposure to negative cognitions related to the feared event, and rehearsal of adaptive cognitions. Research has confirmed that EMDR is an effective treatment for PTSD, but it does not seem to be superior to cognitive-behavioral therapy and other evidence-based treatments. In addition, it is not clear that its benefits depend on rapid eye movements: The results of their meta-analysis of the research led Davidson and Parker (2001) to conclude that eye movements do not add to the effectiveness of EMDR and that its beneficial effects are due to repeated exposure in imagination to the feared event. However, based on the results of their meta-analysis, Lee and Cuijpers (2013) concluded that eye movements do contribute to the effectiveness of EMDR. The inconsistent results of the research have led some investigators to take the position that the “precise mechanisms of effectiveness in EMDR have yet to be determined” (Harik, Hamblen, Norman, & Schnurr, 2018, p. 246).

**Interventions That Use Counterconditioning:** These interventions include systematic desensitization and aversion therapy.

1. **Systematic Desensitization:** Systematic desensitization was developed by Joseph Wolpe as a treatment for phobic anxiety and involves three steps: (1) The client learns deep muscle relaxation or other procedure that produces a state of relaxation. (2) The client and therapist create an anxiety hierarchy, which is a list of stimuli that cause low to high levels of anxiety. (3) The client imagines the stimuli included the hierarchy and uses the relaxation procedure while doing so. This step begins with the least anxiety-arousing stimulus and, once the client can maintain a relaxed state while imagining that stimulus, he or she imagines the next stimulus in the hierarchy and practices the relaxation procedure while doing so. This procedure continues until the client can maintain a relaxed state while imagining the most anxiety-arousing stimulus.

As described by Wolpe, systematic desensitization uses counterconditioning (which he referred to as reciprocal inhibition) and involves replacing an undesirable anxiety response with an incompatible and more desirable relaxation response. From this perspective, the anxiety-arousing stimulus is the conditioned stimulus (CS) and the procedure that naturally produces relaxation is the unconditioned stimulus (US); and, as a result of pairing presentation of the CS and US, the CS produces relaxation rather than anxiety. Research using the dismantling strategy (which involves comparing the individual components of a treatment) has found, however, that the effectiveness of systematic desensitization is due to classical extinction. From this perspective, anxiety-arousing stimuli are conditioned stimuli that, at some time in the past, were paired with an unconditioned stimulus that naturally produced anxiety, and systematic desensitization extinguishes the anxiety response to these stimuli by repeatedly presenting them without that unconditioned stimulus.
2. **Aversion Therapy:** Aversion therapy is also known as aversive counterconditioning and is used to treat addictions and other self-reinforcing behaviors. When using aversion therapy, stimuli associated with the problem behavior are paired with an unconditioned stimulus that naturally produces an unpleasant response that’s incompatible with the reinforcing response. As a result, stimuli associated with the problem behavior become conditioned stimuli and produce the unpleasant response rather than the self-reinforcing response. For example, when aversion therapy is used to treat a client’s fetish, presentation of the fetish object might be paired with electric shock to the client’s arm. In this situation, the fetish object is the CS, the electric shock is the US, and the pain caused by the electric shock is the UR. As the result of pairing the fetish object with electric shock, the fetish object produces a conditioned response (CR) of pain rather than sexual arousal.

When aversion therapy is conducted in imagination rather than in vivo (with real stimuli), it’s known as *covert sensitization*. When using covert sensitization, sessions often end by having the client imagine a relief scene. This involves having the client imagine facing a stimulus associated with the problem behavior but refraining from engaging in the behavior and, as a result, experiencing a sense of relief or other positive sensation.  