# Memory and Forgetting


**Multi-Store Model of Memory**: The multi-store model (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968) describes memory as consisting of three levels: sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory.

(a) *Sensory memory* is capable of storing a large amount of incoming sensory information but does so for a very brief period, with the duration being determined by the type of information. For example, information remains in iconic (visual) sensory memory for about one-half second and remains in echoic (auditory) sensory memory for about two seconds.

(b) When we pay attention to incoming sensory information, it’s transferred to *short-term memory*, which stores a limited amount of information for only about 20 seconds unless the information is rehearsed (repeated over and over again). Short-term memory consists of memory span and working memory: (a) Memory span is the storage capacity of short-term memory and is also known as primary memory. According to Miller (1956), the capacity of short-term memory is between 7 <u>+</u> 2 units of information but can be expanded by “chunking” information. For example, to maintain 14 words in short-term memory, you can chunk the 14 words into 7 word pairs. (b) Working memory is responsible for processing and manipulating information that’s in short-term memory. For instance, it’s working memory that allows you to mentally solve simple math problems. 

(c) Information is transferred from short-term to *long-term memory* when it’s encoded, for example, by relating it to something that’s already stored in long-term memory. The capacity and duration of long-term memory is believed to be unlimited, and it’s divided into recent (secondary) and remote (tertiary) memory. Recent long-term memory contains memories that have been stored from minutes to years and, of the types of memory, is most adversely affected in adulthood by increasing age. Remote long-term memory contains memories that have been stored for years to decades.

The three-store model has been used to explain the *serial position effect*, which occurs when a person is asked to memorize a list of unrelated words and then asked to recall as many words as possible in any order either immediately or after a brief delay. When asked to recall the words immediately, a person is likely to exhibit both primacy and recency effects. In other words, the person will recall more words at the beginning and end of the list than words in the middle of the list because words from the beginning of the list have been stored in long-term memory, while words from the end of the list are still in short-term memory. In contrast, when asked to recall the words after a brief delay, the person will exhibit only a primacy effect because words from the end of the list are no longer in short-term memory.

**Baddeley’s Model of Working Memory**: According to Baddeley (2000; Repovs & Baddeley, 2006), the working memory aspect of short-term memory consists of a central executive and three subsystems – a phonological loop, a visuo-spatial sketchpad, and an episodic buffer. The central executive controls the three subsystems by directing attention to relevant information and coordinating other cognitive processes (e.g., the processes required to mentally solve math problems). The phonological loop is responsible for the temporary storage of verbal information, while the visuo-spatial sketchpad is responsible for the temporary storage of visual and spatial information. The episodic buffer integrates verbal, visual, and spatial information and links working memory to long-term memory. 

**Long-Term Memory:** In addition to categorizing long-term memories as recent or remote, they can be classified as procedural or declarative. *Procedural memories* are also referred to as nondeclarative memories and are memories for learned skills and actions such as remembering how to ride a bicycle and play the saxophone. *Declarative memories* are divided into two types – semantic and episodic: Semantic memories are memories for facts, concepts, and other kinds of knowledge – e.g., remembering that the multi-store model distinguishes between sensory, short-term, and long-term memory. Episodic (autobiographical) memories are memories for personally experienced events – e.g., remembering where you went on your last vacation.
Long-term memories are also classified as retrospective or prospective. *Retrospective memories* are memories for events that occurred in the past, while *prospective memories* are memories for events that will occur in the future. Remembering that you have a doctor’s appointment in two weeks is a prospective memory.

Finally, long-term memories are sometimes categorized as explicit or implicit. *Explicit memory* consists of memories that require conscious effort to retrieve and is often used as a synonym for declarative memory, which includes semantic and episodic memories. *Implicit memory* consists of memories that are recalled without conscious effort. It is often treated as a synonym for procedural memory. However, some investigators distinguish between declarative and nondeclarative memory, view implicit memory as synonymous with nondeclarative memory, and describe nondeclarative memory as including procedural memory, classical conditioning, and priming.

**Priming:** Priming is both a phenomenon and a method for studying implicit memory. As a phenomenon, priming occurs when exposure to a stimulus (the prime) subsequently facilitates or inhibits a person’s response to the same or a similar stimulus. Priming has been used to explain a number of other phenomena including the effects of subliminal advertising, mere exposure effects, and the activation of stereotypes (Bermeitinger, 2014). As a method, there are several different types of priming that each use different methods to investigate implicit memory. Types of priming include perceptual and conceptual priming, affective/evaluative priming, masked priming, semantic priming, associative priming, and repetition priming. Repetition priming is one of the most often used types of priming in research. It occurs when presentation of a word or object facilitates later identification of that word or object in a different format or context. Methods for assessing repetition priming include word-stem and word-fragment completion, which involve having subjects read a list of words and, at a later time, asking them to complete a list of word stems or word fragments with the first word that comes to mind. Studies using these methods have found that subjects usually complete the stems or fragments with words they were previously exposed to. For example, on the word-stem completion task, subjects are most likely to complete the word stem STR____ with STRONG when the word list they previously read contained the word STRONG but no other words that begin with STR. Similarly, on the word-fragment completion task, subjects are more likely to complete the word fragment L__D_R with LADDER rather than LEADER when the word list contained the word LADDER but not LEADER. 

Evidence that priming relies on implicit memory is provided by several types of research including studies of patients with amnesia who have no explicit memory for new information but have largely intact implicit memory. This research has found that these patients perform just as well as individuals without amnesia on word-stem completion, word-fragment completion, and other priming tasks even though the patients have no conscious recollection of the priming stimulus (e.g., Graf, Squire, & Mandler, 1984).

**False Memories:** False memories are also known as illusory memories and “are memories that do not correspond to events as they actually happened” (Schwartz, 2021, p. 215). Techniques used to study false memories include the Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) procedure, false memory induction, and imagination inflation. The *DRM procedure* (Roediger & McDermott, 1995) involves asking subjects to read a list of semantically related words (e.g., candy, sugar, bitter, chocolate, taste, cake, honey) and, after a delay, asking them to recall as many of the words included in the list as possible. Studies using this procedure have consistently found that it induces a false memory for words, with many subjects recalling a critical lure (e.g., sweet), which is a word that is related to the words in the list but was not presented. Subjects also tend to be highly confident that the critical lure was on the list. The DRM procedure is a relatively simple technique for studying how false memories are affected by different factors such as emotional state, age, or stress. A criticism of the procedure is that it does not correspond to – and, therefore, is not a good model for – false memories in the real world. 

False memory induction and imagination inflation are useful for identifying factors that elicit false memories in situations that are similar to real-world situations (e.g., situations that elicit false repressed memories). When using *false memory induction* (Loftus, Coan, & Pickrell, 1996), the researcher induces a false memory by telling the subject that a family member told the researcher that the subject had experienced a particular event during childhood (e.g., got lost at the mall). However, the family member actually confirmed that the subject had not experienced that event. Studies using this procedure have found that, even when subjects initially deny remembering the event, after the researcher repeatedly questions them about it, many say they remember the event and provide details about it that were not told to them by the researcher. When using *imagination inflation* (Garry, Manning, Loftus, & Sherman, 1996), the researcher induces a false memory by having a subject repeatedly imagine an event that the researcher knows did not occur. Research using this technique has found that, when subjects are asked to rate their confidence that the event occurred, their level of confidence increases as the number of times they imagine the event increases.

**Explanations for Forgetting:** Trace decay theory and interference theory have been used to explain why information is forgotten. According to trace decay theory, memories create physical changes in the brain that deteriorate over time when they’re not rehearsed or recalled. Trace decay theory has not been well-supported by the research.

In contrast, interference theory has received consistent research support and attributes forgetting to the disruption of memories by previously or more recently acquired information. It distinguishes between two types of interference – proactive and retroactive:

(a) *Proactive interference* occurs when previously learned information interferes with the ability to learn or recall new information. For example, proactive interference has occurred when memorization of a list of words in the past interferes with your ability to learn or recall a new list of words.  

(b) *Retroactive interference* occurs when newly acquired information interferes with the ability to recall previously acquired information. Retroactive interference has occurred when you’re unable to recall the first list of words you memorized after you memorize a second list of words. 
Note that proactive and retroactive interference are most likely to occur when previously and more recently acquired information are similar. For example, interference is more likely to occur when a student is taught one way to solve a math problem and is taught an alternative way to solve the same kind of problem two weeks later than when the student is taught different strategies for solving two entirely different kinds of math problems.

**Techniques for Improving Memory:** Techniques for improving memory include elaborative rehearsal, mnemonics (memory aids), encoding specificity, and practice testing.

1. **Elaborative Rehearsal:** Elaborative rehearsal involves making new information meaningful by, for example, relating it to something you already know or generating personally meaningful examples. Encoding information by making it meaningful is referred to as semantic encoding and is considered the best way to ensure that information is transferred to and can be retrieved from long-term memory (e.g., Craik & Lockhart, 1972).

2. **Verbal Mnemonics:** Acronyms and acrostics are verbal mnemonics that are useful for memorizing a list of words. When creating an *acronym*, the first letter of each word to be memorized is used to create a word or pronounceable non-word. For example, OCEAN can be used to remember the “Big Five” personality traits – <u>o</u>penness to experience, <u>c</u>onscientiousness, <u>e</u>xtraversion, <u>a</u>greeableness, and <u>n</u>euroticism. When using an *acrostic*, a phrase or sentence consisting of familiar words is created, with each word in the phrase or sentence beginning with the first letter of one of the words to be memorized. As an example, a student might use the phrase PLEASE EXCUSE MY DEAR AUNT SALLY to memorize the order of operations in a math problem – <u>p</u>arentheses, <u>e</u>xponents, <u>m</u>ultiplication, <u>d</u>ivision, <u>a</u>ddition, and <u>s</u>ubtraction.

3. **Visual Imagery Mnemonics:** The keyword method and method of loci are mnemonics that use visual imagery. The *keyword method* is useful for paired associate learning. When using this method to remember that “pato” is the Spanish word for “duck,” you might create an image of a duck with a pot on its head. The *method of loci* is useful for memorizing a list of words and involves linking an image of each word to a specific object in a familiar location. To remember what you need to buy at the grocery store, you might create a visual image that links each item to an object in your living room – an apple balanced on top of a lamp, a loaf of bread on the seat of a chair, etc. When you want to recall the items while at the store, you mentally walk around your living room and observe each item.

4. **Encoding Specificity:** According to the *encoding specificity hypothesis*, retrieval from long-term memory is maximized when the conditions at the time of learning (encoding) new information are the same as the conditions at the time of recall. According to this hypothesis, this occurs because learning conditions serve as retrieval cues. Encoding specificity includes context-dependent learning, which refers to learning and retrieving information in the same environment, and state-dependent learning, which refers to learning and retrieving information while in the same psychological or physiological state. 

5. **Practice Testing:** Practice testing refers to practice recalling information from long-term memory during learning and includes practicing recall by using flashcards and taking practice tests. The positive impact of practice testing is referred to as the *testing effect* and has been confirmed by numerous studies. For example, Dunlosky et al.’s (2013) review of the research led them to conclude that, of 10 learning techniques, practice testing and distributed practice have the greatest utility. According to the mediator effectiveness hypothesis, practice testing improves memory by generating effective mediators (cues) that facilitate the future retrieval of information (Pyc & Rawson, 2010).

**Cognitive Learning Theories:** Cognitive theories of learning focus on the mental processes that are responsible for the acquisition of information and skills.
1. **Tolman’s Latent Learning:** Tolman derived his theory of latent learning from research with rats in mazes. In one study, Tolman and Honzik (1930) compared the performance of three groups of rats: Rats in Group 1 were reinforced with food when they reached the end of the maze every day, rats in Group 2 were never given reinforcement, and rats in Group 3 were not given food when they reached the end of the maze until the eleventh day. These investigators found that the performance of the Group 1 rats gradually improved in terms of speed and errors from the first day through the end of the study, the performance of the Group 2 rats remained the same throughout the study (they wandered randomly through the maze), and the performance of the Group 3 rats was similar to the performance of the Group 2 rats on days one through eleven but, beginning on day twelve, was similar to the performance of the Group 1 rats. Based on these results, Tolman concluded that the Group 3 rats had formed cognitive maps of the maze in the first 10 days without receiving reinforcement for doing so, which allowed them to be indistinguishable from the Group 1 rats once they received reinforcement. He attributed the formation of cognitive maps to latent learning, which occurs without reinforcement or being demonstrated in observable behaviors.

2. **Kohler’s Insight Learning:** Kohler’s theory of insight learning was influenced by Gestalt psychology and was based on his research with chimpanzees. In one study, Kohler (1925) placed Sultan the chimpanzee in a cage that contained a box and had a banana hanging from the ceiling. Sultan quickly noticed the banana (which was out of his reach) and paced back and forth several times. Suddenly, he moved the box beneath the banana, climbed on the box, and retrieved the banana.  Kohler concluded that Sultan was thinking about the problem when he was pacing back and forth and suddenly had insight into the solution to the problem (i.e., had an “a-ha” experience). 

3. **Bandura’s Social Cognitive Theory:** Bandura’s (1986) social cognitive theory was derived from his research on observational learning. In one series of studies, children observed an adult model act either aggressively or nonaggressively toward a clown (“bobo”) doll. Bandura found that children who observed the aggressive model were more likely than those who observed the nonaggressive model to subsequently act aggressively toward the doll and that this occurred whether the children observed a live model, a filmed model, or a filmed cartoon model. In addition, among children who observed an aggressive model, boys and girls were more likely to imitate a model of the same gender, boys acted more aggressively than girls toward the doll, and providing the children with a reward for acting aggressively reduced the gender difference in aggressiveness.

Based on the results of his research, Bandura concluded that observational learning depends on four mediational processes – attention, retention, production, and motivation: First, the learner must notice and pay attention to the model’s behavior. Second, the learner must store the information about the model’s behavior in memory. Third, the learner must be capable of imitating the model’s behavior. And, fourth, the learner must be motivated to perform the behavior. According to Bandura, reinforcement increases motivation, but it can take the form of self-reinforcement, external reinforcement (given to learner by someone else), or vicarious reinforcement (given to the model). 

Research evaluating the application of Bandura’s theory to the treatment of phobias has found that modeling is most effective when it uses guided participation, which is also known as participant modeling. It involves having the client observe a model gradually approach the feared stimulus in steps and having the client perform each step with assistance from the model. In addition, coping models who are initially apprehensive about approaching the feared stimulus but gradually overcome their fear are more effective than mastery models who initially approach the feared stimulus without hesitation. 