# Other Measures of Cognitive Ability


**Individual and Group Measures of Cognitive Ability:** In addition to the SB5 and Wechsler tests, you want to be familiar with the following individual of cognitive ability for the EPPP:

1. **Cognitive Assessment System, Second Edition (CAS2):** The CAS2 is a measure of cognitive processing abilities for individuals five to 18 years of age. It’s based on the PASS cognitive/neurological theory, which distinguishes between the four cognitive functions identified by Luria – planning, attention, simultaneous processing, and successive processing.

2. **Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Fifth Edition (PPVT-5):**  The PPVT-5 is a measure of receptive vocabulary for words in Standard English for individuals 2:6 to 90+ years of age. The PPVT-5’s stimulus cards contain four pictures; and, for each card, the examiner says a word and the examinee indicates the picture that best illustrates the meaning of the word. Because the test does not require reading or writing, it is useful for examinees who have speech or motor impairments. The PPVT-5 is co-normed with the Expressive Vocabulary Test-Third Edition (EVT-3).

3. **Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children, Second Edition (KABC-II):**  The KABC-II is a measure of cognitive ability for children ages 3:0 through 18:11 and was designed to be a culturally fair test by minimizing cultural content and verbal instructions and responses. It provides scores on five scales (simultaneous, sequential, planning, learning, and knowledge).  Results can be interpreted using the Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) model of cognitive abilities or Luria’s neuropsychological processing model when crystallized abilities would not be an appropriate measure of an examinee’s abilities. 

4. **Columbia Mental Maturity Scale-Third Edition (CMMS):** The CMMS is a measure of general reasoning ability for children ages 3:6 through 9:11. The test’s stimulus cards contain three to five pictures, and the examinee indicates the picture on each card that does not belong with the others. The CMMS does not require verbal responses or fine motor skills and was originally developed for children with cerebral palsy, but it is also useful for children with sensory, speech, or other motor impairments or limited English proficiency.

5. **Leiter International Performance Scale-Third Edition (Leiter-3):** The Leiter-3 is a nonverbal measure of cognitive abilities for individuals 3 to 75+ years of age who have cognitive delays, speech or hearing impairments, autism spectrum disorder, or limited English proficiency. It can be administered without verbal instructions and requires examinees to match a set of response cards to corresponding illustrations. Test items emphasize fluid intelligence and assess four areas of cognitive functioning – visualization, reasoning, memory, and attention.

6. **Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM):**  Raven’s SPM is a nonverbal measure of abstract reasoning that provides an estimate of fluid intelligence. It is relatively free from the effects of specific educational and cultural learning. The test is for individuals ages 6:0 and older; and, because instructions are simple and can be pantomimed, it’s useful for examinees who have hearing or speech impairments, physical disabilities, or limited English proficiency. It has also been found useful for individuals with autism spectrum disorder and is less likely than the Wechsler tests to underestimate their level of intelligence (e.g., Dawson, Soulieres, Gernsbacher, & Mottron, 2007). Raven’s SPM includes 60 matrices that require examinees to indicate which of several alternatives completes each matrix.


Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children, Second Edition (KABC-II) and Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM) are the two assessments that would be used when trying to lower cultural bias and not have cognitive assessment affected by English proficiency or cultural learning.


**Group Intelligence Tests:** Group intelligence tests are used in schools, organizations, and the military and include the following:

1. **Wonderlic Cognitive Ability Test:** The Wonderlic Cognitive Ability Test (formerly the Wonderlic Personnel Test) is a 12-minute test of general intelligence for adults and consists of 50 verbal, numerical, and spatial items. It’s used primarily to assist with hiring decisions.

2. **Cognitive Abilities Test, Form 7 (CogAT7):** The CogAT7 assesses cognitive abilities in three domains – verbal, quantitative, and nonverbal. It’s appropriate for students in grades 2 through 12 and is used to predict academic performance and identify gifted/talented and at-risk students.

**College Admissions Tests:** The Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT) and the Graduate Record Exam (GRE) are commonly used to assist with college admission decisions. Both are norm-referenced tests which provide scores that compare an individual examinee’s scores to scores obtained by individuals in the standardization samples. The SAT is a college admissions test for students in grades 11 and 12 and is part of the SAT Suite of Assessments, which also includes Preliminary SATs (PSATs) for students in grades 8 through 10. As described in the *SAT Suite of Assessments Technical Manual*, these tests are a longitudinal assessment system that measures “the skills and knowledge needed for college readiness at grade appropriate levels” (The College Board, 2017, p. iii). The SAT provides scores for reading, writing and language, and math, and for an optional essay section that covers reading, analysis, and writing. 

The GRE consists of a General Test and Subject Tests. The General Test is used as an admissions test for graduate and professional schools. It measures skills that are not related to a specific area of study but are important for academic achievement, and it provides scores on verbal, quantitative, and analytical reasoning. The Subject Tests assess knowledge of six fields of study: biology, chemistry, literature in English, mathematics, physics, and psychology.

**Infant and Toddler Tests:** Tests used to assess the abilities of infants and toddlers include the following:

1. **Fagan Test of Infant Intelligence (FTII):** The development of the FTII was based on research indicating that information processing during infancy is a good predictor of IQ during childhood. The test is appropriate for infants three to 12 months of age and evaluates an infant’s selective attention and recognition memory. An infant’s score is determined by the amount of time he/she spends looking at novel stimuli.

2. **Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Fourth Edition (Bayley-4):**  The Bayley-4 is used to assess the current developmental status of children ages 16 days to 42 months. Subtests are provided for five domains: cognitive, motor, language, social-emotional, and adaptive behavior. A briefer version of the test, the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Screening Test (Bayley-4 Screening Test) is available. It assesses three domains (cognitive, motor, and language) and is useful for determining if a more comprehensive assessment is needed.

**Computerized Adaptive Testing:** Computerized adaptive testing (CAT) is most associated with the assessment of cognitive ability and achievement, but it is also used for other purposes including assessing the severity of psychiatric symptoms. When used to assess ability, computerized adaptive tests are tailored to individual examinees by presenting items that are appropriate to each examinee’s level of ability. Testing usually begins with a moderately difficult question. If the examinee answers that question correctly, the next question will be more difficult; if the examinee answers the question incorrectly, the next question will be less difficult. This process continues until the stopping point has been reached, which is often when the examinee has answered a sufficient number of items to provide a good estimate of the examinee’s ability level. The development of computer adaptive tests most often involves using item response theory (IRT) because it allows the test developer to identify the difficulty level of each item that is being considered for inclusion in the test and create an item bank that includes items ranging from low to high in terms of difficulty level. (Additional information about IRT is provided in the Test Construction content summary.) 

Computer adaptive tests have several advantages (Thompson, 2011): First, they can reduce testing time by 50% or more because examinees do not answer all questions in the item pool. Second, they can be designed to assess the ability of all examinees at the same level of precision. Third, they help maintain test security because the same questions are not administered to all examinees. Fourth, they can have a positive effect on the motivation and satisfaction of examinees because the questions they answer are within the appropriate level of challenge (i.e., are not too easy or too difficult). Disadvantages of computer adaptive tests are they are time- and resource-intensive to create and usually do not allow examinees to review questions they have already answered.
