# Other Measures of Personality


**Structured Personality Tests:** Structured personality tests require examinees to provide information about their personality traits by responding to objective, non-ambiguous items.

1. **Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF):**  The 16 PF was developed by Cattell (1947) using the lexical strategy and factor analysis. The lexical strategy is based on the assumption that important personality traits are encoded in language. Therefore, Cattell first identified words in the English language that are used to describe personality and then used factor analysis to convert the list of words to a small number of primary and global traits. The results of his analyses yielded 16 primary traits (e.g., warmth, dominance, sensitivity) and five broader global traits (extraversion, anxiety, tough-mindedness, independence, and self-control) that each include multiple primary traits.

2. **Edwards Personal Preference Schedule (EPPS):**  The EPPS (Edwards, 1959) assesses 15 basic needs that were derived from Murray’s system of human needs (e.g., achievement, affiliation, dominance, autonomy). Test items contain two statements that each assess a different need and are similar in terms of social desirability, and examinees choose the statement from each pair that best describes them. The test’s forced-choice format yields ipsative scores that indicate the relative strength of an examinee’s needs. These scores allow intra-individual comparisons but do not permit inter-individual comparisons because they don’t provide information on the absolute strengths of an examinee’s needs.

3. **Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI):** The MBTI (Myers & Briggs, 1943/1962) is based on Jung’s personality typology and provides information on four bipolar personality dimensions:  introversion-extraversion (I, E), sensing-intuition (S, N), thinking-feeling (T, F), and judging-perceiving (J, P). An examinee’s responses to test’s items are reported in terms of one of 16 personality types that represent different combinations of the four dimensions – e.g., introverted-sensing-thinking-perceiving (ISTP).

4. **NEO Personality Inventory-3 (NEO-PI-3):**  The NEO-PI-3 assesses the “Big Five” personality traits: openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. The traits were identified by Costa and McCrae (1985) using a lexical approach and factor analysis. The test provides scores on the five personality traits and six or more facets (specific traits) for each of the five traits. Research using the NEO Personality Inventory and other measures of the Big Five have linked patterns of the five traits to several disorders. For example, Aschwanden et al.’s (2021) meta-analysis of longitudinal research found that, of the Big Five personality traits, high levels of neuroticism and low levels of conscientiousness were significantly and most consistently related to an increased risk for Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of neurocognitive disorder. (The acronyms OCEAN and CANOE are useful for remembering the names of the five traits.)

**Projective Personality Tests:** Projective personality tests are based on the assumption that “people will ‘project’ their personalities if presented with unstructured, ambiguous stimuli and an unrestricted opportunity to respond” (Pomerantz, 2008, p. 211).

1. **Rorschach Inkblot Test:** The Rorschach Inkblot Test (Rorschach, 1921/1942) includes10 cards that each contain a bilaterally symmetrical inkblot printed on a white background. Test administration usually involves two phases: During the free association phase, the examiner presents the 10 cards one at a time and asks the examinee to describe what he or she sees. Then, during the inquiry phase, the examiner questions the examinee about what parts of the inkblot determined his or her responses. A number of scoring systems are available. Exner’s Comprehensive System is a commonly used method and involves scoring an examinee’s responses in terms of several categories, including the following:
(a) *Location:* the area in the inkblot that the examinee used to derive his/her response (the whole inkblot, a common detail, or an unusual detail)
(b) *Determinants:* the characteristic(s) of the inkblot that determined the examinee’s response (the inkblot’s form, movement, color, and/or shading)
(c) *Content:* the category of the examinee’s response (human, animal, or nature)
(d) *Form Quality:* the similarity of the examinee’s response to the actual shape of the inkblot
(e) *Popularity:* the extent to which the examinee’s response is given by other examinees
Interpretation involves considering the number and type of responses the examinee made in each category. For instance, many color responses indicate emotionality and impulsiveness; many “whole” responses suggest creative or theoretical thinking; and confabulation (overgeneralizing a part of the inkblot to the whole) suggests brain injury, cognitive impairment, or schizophrenia.

2. **Thematic Apperception Test (TAT):**  Murray (1943) based the TAT on his system of human needs. The test consists of 30 cards that each depict a different picture containing one or more human figures. The examinee is asked to make up a story about each picture that describes what’s happening, what led up to that event, how the people are thinking and feeling, and how the story ends. Murray’s scoring system involves identifying the story’s hero, the hero’s needs and press (internal and external causes of the hero’s behavior), and the outcomes for each story.

