# Cognitive Development

**Cognitive Development
Theories of Cognitive Development:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with Piaget’s constructivist theory, Vygotsky’s sociocultural theory, and information processing theories of cognitive development.

1. **Piaget’s Constructivist Theory:** Piaget’s theory assumes that cognitive development relies on a combination of biological maturation and experience and describes it as an active process in which a child constructs knowledge by interacting with the environment. According to Piaget, the source of motivation for cognitive development is *equilibration*, which is an innate drive toward a state of equilibrium between one’s current ways of thinking and the environment. When disequilibrium occurs, a child is motivated to restore equilibrium through adaptation, which consists of two processes: *Assimilation* occurs when a child attempts to understand a new object or situation using an existing cognitive schema, while *accommodation* occurs when a child modifies an existing cognitive schema or creates a new schema to fit the new object or situation. For example, when a young child who’s familiar with dogs sees a cow for the first time, she might attempt to assimilate the cow into her dog schema because the cow has four legs and is the same color as a neighbor’s dog. But, when the cow moos instead of barks, the child will experience disequilibrium and will create a new cow schema with the help of a parent who says the animal is a cow and points out that cows are bigger than dogs and say “moo” instead of “woof.” 

Piaget also proposed that cognitive development involves four universal stages that emerge in the same order for all children, although the age at which each stage begins is affected by a child’s culture and other environmental factors. Note that developmental stages can be classified as continuous or discontinuous and active or passive: Piaget’s stages are classified as discontinuous because each stage involves qualitatively different cognitive processes and are classified as active because Piaget considered cognitive development to be an active process in which children interact with the environment during each stage to construct their own knowledge.

(a) The **sensorimotor stage** extends from birth to about 2 years of age. During this stage, cognitive development involves learning about the environment through sensory input and motor actions. It includes six substages: 

| Sensorimotor Substage                                                                                                                                                                 | Age                                                                                                                                                                                   | Description                                                                                                                                                                           |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1: Reflexive Reactions                                                                                                                                                                | 0-1 mo.                                                                                                                                                                               | Responds to external stimuli with innate reflexes                                                                                                                                     |
| 2: Primary Circular Reactions                                                                                                                                                         | 1-4 mos.                                                                                                                                                                              | Repeats enjoyable actions involving his/her own body (e.g., sucks thumb, kicks legs)                                                                                                  |
| 3: Secondary Circular Reactions                                                                                                                                                       | 4-8 mos.                                                                                                                                                                              | Reproduces actions involving objects (e.g., shakes rattle to hear sound) and imitates familiar actions of others                                                                      |
| 4: Coordination of Secondary Circular Reactions                                                                                                                                       | 8-12 mos.                                                                                                                                                                             | Intentionally combines secondary reactions to achieve goals (e.g., drops small toy in a cup and then picks up the cup) and imitates actions of others that aren’t in their repertoire |
| 5: Tertiary Circular Reactions                                                                                                                                                        | 12-18 mos.                                                                                                                                                                            | Deliberately experiments to discover consequences (e.g., drops ball from different heights) and find new ways to achieve goals                                                        |
| 6: Internalization of Schemas                                                                                                                                                         | 18-24 mos.                                                                                                                                                                            | Develops mental representations of reality and solves some problems mentally                                                                                                          |

The accomplishments of the sensorimotor stage include the development of object permanence and representational (symbolic) thought. *Object permanence* begins to develop in the fourth substage and is the ability to recognize that people and objects continue to exist even when they can’t be seen or heard. *Representational thought* emerges in the sixth substage and allows children to use mental images, gestures, and words to represent people, objects, and events and engage in make-believe play and deferred imitation: Make-believe play is also known as pretend play and symbolic play and involves acting out everyday activities such as pretending to feed toy food to a stuffed animal. Deferred imitation is the ability to remember the actions of other people and imitate those actions at a later time.

Note that research has found that some of the accomplishments of the sensorimotor stage occur earlier than Piaget proposed. For example, Piaget concluded that deferred imitation doesn’t occur until substage 6, but there’s evidence that infants show deferred imitation of facial expressions after a brief delay by 6 weeks of age (substage 2) and deferred imitation of very simple behaviors after a brief delay as early as substage 4 but don’t exhibit deferred imitation of complex behavioral sequences until substage 6 (Berk, 2013; Shaffer & Kipp, 2010).

(b) Next is the **preoperational stage** which extends from about 2 to 7 years of age.  During this stage, representational thought increases and allows children to think about the past and future and about things that aren’t in the immediate environment. Preoperational children also engage in more sophisticated forms of make-believe play and use one object to represent another (e.g., pretend that a cardboard box is a race car), invent imaginary playmates, and participate in role-playing with other children. Preoperational thought is limited, however, by several factors including transductive (precausal) reasoning and egocentrism. *Transductive reasoning* leads preoperational children to think that unrelated events that occur at the same time are causally related, while *egocentrism* limits their ability to understand that other people don’t experience things the same way they do. Magical thinking and animism are two outcomes of the limitations of this stage: Magical thinking is the belief that just thinking about something can make it happen, and animism is the belief that inanimate objects have lifelike qualities. In addition, children in this stage cannot conserve, which means they don’t understand that certain physical characteristics of an object stay the same when the object’s outward appearance changes. For example, when two identical short glasses containing the same amount of water are placed in front of a child, the child will agree that the glasses contain the same amount of water. However, after the child observes water from one of the short glasses being poured into a tall narrow glass, the child will say the tall narrow glass (which has a higher water level) has more water. The inability to conserve is due primarily to two characteristics of preoperational thinking: *centration*, which is the tendency to focus on one aspect of an object or situation to the exclusion of all other aspects, and *irreversibility*, which is the inability to understand that an action or process can be reversed.  

(c) Next is the **concrete operational stage,** which extends from about 7 to 12 years of age. During this stage, children use logical operations, which are mental activities that allow them to think logically about concrete situations. As a result, they’re able to classify objects according to their physical characteristics; order items in terms of length or other quantitative dimension; perform number operations such as adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing; and conserve. Conservation depends on the operations of decentration and reversibility: *Decentration* is the ability to focus on more than one aspect of an object or situation at the same time, and *reversibility* is the ability to understand that actions and processes can be reversed. Conservation develops in a predictable order during this stage: Conservation of number occurs first and is followed, in order, by conservation of length, liquid quantity, mass, weight, and volume. The sequential emergence of conservation skills is an example of *horizontal decalage*, which is the gradual development of a skill within a single stage of development.

(d) Finally, the **formal operational stage** begins at about 12 years of age and continues into adulthood. Individuals in this stage can think abstractly, which allows them to think about abstract principles (such as democracy and equality) and engage in hypothetical-deductive reasoning and propositional thought: *Hypothetical-deductive reasoning* is the ability to derive and test alternative hypotheses to determine the solution to a problem, and *propositional thought* is the ability to evaluate the logic of verbal statements (propositions) without having concrete examples. The beginning of this stage is characterized by renewed egocentrism, which involves an inability to separate one’s own abstract thoughts from those of other people. Elkind (1981) identified the imaginary audience and personal fable as two characteristics of adolescent egocentrism: The *imaginary audience* is an adolescent’s belief that he or she is always the subject of other people’s attention and concern. The *personal fable* is an adolescent’s beliefs that he or she is special and unique, can’t be understood by others, and is omnipotent and invulnerable to harm.

Note that Piaget’s theory has been challenged for several reasons (Sigelman & Rider, 2012). For example, some studies have found that it underestimates the abilities of infants and young children: As noted above, there’s evidence that deferred imitation occurs earlier in the sensorimotor stage than predicted by Piaget. In addition, some investigators have found that, in certain conditions, children as young as three or four years of age can be taught to conserve. Another criticism is that Piaget did not adequately consider the impact of social interactions on cognitive development. Although he acknowledged the role of peers in helping children reach new conclusions and adopt new perspectives, he did not think that children’s cognitive development was affected very much by their interactions with adults.

2. **Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Theory:** As its name suggests, Vygotsky’s sociocultural theory views cognitive development as being influenced by social and cultural factors. It also proposes that cognitive development always occurs first on an <u>inter</u>personal level and then on an <u>intra</u>personal level. For example, when helping a child understand how to solve a math word problem, a teacher might provide the child with verbal prompts that help the child solve the problem. Then, when solving similar problems alone, the child will verbalize the teacher’s prompts to guide his or her own behavior. Vygotsky referred to the speech that children utter aloud to guide their actions as *private speech*, and research has shown that the frequent use of private speech is associated with more effective problem-solving. The studies have also found that, as predicted by Vygotsky, private speech begins to be replaced by inner (silent) speech by about 7 years of age. However, older children, adolescents, and adults may revert to private speech when faced with difficult tasks (Bergin & Bergin, 2015).    
According to Vygotsky, learning precedes and facilitates cognitive development and learning is most rapid when it occurs within a child’s *zone of proximal development*, which is the gap between what a child can currently do independently and what he or she can do with assistance from an adult or more competent peer. The assistance provided to a child by another person is referred to as *scaffolding* and is more effective when it involves the use of prompts, questions, and feedback rather than providing correct answers and solutions. Vygotsky also proposed that *make-believe (symbolic) play* creates a zone of proximal development that enables children to practice new social roles and behaviors.

3. **Information Processing Theories:** The information processing theories of cognitive development focus on the mental processes involved in acquiring, encoding, storing, and retrieving information (e.g., perception, attention, memory) and the changes that occur in these processes over time. In contrast to Piaget’s constructivist theory, which describes cognitive development as a discontinuous process consisting of stages that are characterized by qualitative differences in thinking, information processing theories view cognitive development as a gradual continuous process with stages that involve quantitative changes in mental processes. However, like Piaget’s theory, these theories adopt a constructivist approach that describes individuals as active participants in their own cognitive development. Note that neo-Piagetian theories (e.g., Case, 1991; Pascual-Leone, 1970) combine elements of Piaget’s theory and information processing theories: For example, the neo-Piagetian theories identify stages of cognitive development that have qualitatively different characteristics but attribute the differences in characteristics to improvements in working memory, attention, and other mental processes that are the result of a combination of increasing cognitive complexity and biological maturation. 

**Theory of Mind:** Theory of mind (ToM) is the “ability to explain and predict other people’s behaviour by attributing to them independent mental states, such as beliefs and desires” (Gallagher & Frith, 2003, p. 77). Research using false-belief tasks has found that ToM develops when children are between 3 and 5 years of age (Wellman et al., 2001). False-belief tasks test a child’s understanding that another person can have a mistaken belief about something and will act in accord with that belief. The change-of-location task is a frequently used false-belief task. It involves having children observe a scene in which Person A puts an object in Location 1 and then leaves the scene. Person B then moves the object to Location 2. After observing this scene, children are asked where Person A will look for the object when she returns. Children under 4 years of age usually predict that Person A will look for the object in Location 2 because they do not understand that Person A does not have the same information that they have, while most children 4.5 to 5 years of age will predict that Person A will look in Location 1. Finally, research has linked having imaginary companions and impersonating imaginary characters during childhood to ToM. For example, Taylor and Carlson (1997) compared 3- and 4-year-old children who had or did not have imaginary companions and/or did or did not role-play imaginary characters. The results of their study indicated that 4-year-old (but not 3-year-old) children who had imaginary companions and/or role-played imaginary characters had more advanced ToM as assessed by a false-belief task and other measures of ToM.

**Eyewitness Testimony:** Eyewitness testimony is not always accurate, and research has identified several factors that contribute to its inaccuracy. For example, Loftus (2005) found that inaccuracy is often due to the *misinformation effect*, which occurs when memories of an event are altered by subsequent exposure to misleading information about the event. The studies have also shown that the effects of misinformation tend to decrease with increasing age: The eyewitness testimony of young children tends to be least accurate followed, in order, by the testimony of older children, adolescents, and adults, and this is because suggestibility declines with increasing age (Volpini, Melis, Petralia, & Rosenberg, 2016). However, there is evidence that, in certain conditions, the testimony of young children is more accurate than the testimony of older children, adolescents, and adults and that this *reverse developmental trend* is due to age-related differences in knowledge: Increasing age is associated with greater knowledge, and greater knowledge increases the likelihood of generating spontaneous false memories from suggestive information (Brainerd, Reyna, & Ceci, 2008). Finally, there is some consensus that children as young as 3 years of age can provide reasonably accurate eyewitness testimony as long as they are interviewed in a nonsuggestive way and are not exposed to misinformation (e,g., Gordon, Baker-Ward, & Ornstein, 2001). 

**Cognition in Adulthood:** Researchers interested in memory and other aspects of cognition in adulthood have identified several phenomena that you want to be familiar with for the exam:

1. **Childhood Amnesia:** The studies have confirmed that infants have some long-term memory and that the length of time that events are remembered increases substantially during infancy and toddlerhood. For example, six-month-old infants can remember information for about 24 hours, while 20-month-old infants can remember information for up to 12 months (Bauer, 2006). However, most adults cannot recall events they experienced before they were three or four years old (Tustin & Hayne, 2010). There’s no consensus about the cause of this *childhood amnesia*, but several explanations have been proposed. One explanation is that language allows memories to be encoded and children less than 3 or 4 years of age have limited language skills. Another explanation is that a sense of self is necessary for developing personal memories and very young children have not yet developed a stable, coherent sense of self. 
2. **Reminiscence Bump:** Research has found that, when older adults are asked to recall important events from their lives, the largest number of recalled events occurred during the ten-year period prior to being tested and the second largest number of recalled events occurred when they were between the ages of about 15 and 25. The increased memory for events that occurred from mid-adolescence to the mid-20s is referred to as the *reminiscence bump*, and it’s been attributed to several factors including identity formation. In other words, it’s during this period that many memorable events (e.g., events related to life transitions) occur that are important for adult identity formation (Wang, 2013). 

3. **Effects of Increasing Age:** Some aspects of memory are affected more than others by increasing age. Specifically, the studies have consistently found that older adults experience the greatest age-related decline in recent long-term (secondary) memory, followed by the working memory aspect of short-term memory. In contrast, the storage aspect of short-term memory (also known as primary memory) and remote long-term memory (also known as tertiary memory) are relatively unaffected by increasing age. The research has also found that age-related declines in recent long-term memory often occur because older adults are less likely than younger adults to use effective encoding strategies and that older adults benefit from training in the use of memory strategies (e.g., Gross & Rebok, 2011).

Other studies have looked at the effects of increasing age on declarative and nondeclarative memory, which are described by some experts as the primary aspects of long-term memory. *Declarative memory* is also sometimes referred to as explicit memory and consists of memories that are retrieved consciously and intentionally. It includes episodic and semantic memories which are, respectively, memories for autobiographical events and memories for facts, concepts, and other kinds of knowledge. Note that self-defining memory (SDM) is sometimes identified as a component of episodic memory that consists of memories which contribute to the construction and maintenance of personal identity. According to Singer (2005), SDMs have five characteristics: emotional intensity, vividness, high levels of repetition, linkage to similar memories, and connections to enduring concerns or unresolved conflicts. There is evidence that, when compared to the SDMs of younger adults, those of older adults are self-rated as being more vivid and positive and of greater importance. In addition, the SDMs of older adults are more likely to include integrative meaning statements that address what the memories have taught them about themselves (Singer, Rexhaj, & Baddeley, 2007). *Nondeclarative memory* is also sometimes referred to as implicit memory and consists of memories that are retrieved automatically or with little effort. It includes procedural memories (memories for learned skills and actions), memories created by classical conditioning (conditioned associations between two stimuli), and memories affected by priming (in which prior exposure to a certain stimulus affects how a person responds to a subsequent stimulus).

The research has consistently found that episodic memory declines with increasing age in adulthood while semantic memory shows little or no age-related decline. However, the research has provided inconsistent results for nondeclarative memory: Some studies suggest that nondeclarative memory remains relatively stable during the adult years, while others have found that some aspects of nondeclarative memory decline with increasing age in adulthood, with the decline being less than that associated with episodic memory (Brickman & Stern, 2009; Ward et al., 2020; Ward & Shanks, 2018). [Note that some investigators define explicit memory as consisting of memories that require conscious effort to recall and do not distinguish between episodic and semantic memory. When this definition is used, explicit memory is described as decreasing with increasing age during adulthood (e.g., Ward, et al., 2020).]
4. **Synchrony Effect:** Research on the *synchrony effect* has confirmed that there are age-related differences with regard to the optimal time for successful performance on various visual and verbal memory tasks, problem-solving tasks, and other cognitive tasks, especially tasks that depend on the ability to inhibit a prepotent response. Specifically, the studies have found that the optimal time is related to differences in circadian rhythms and that peak circadian arousal and task performance is in the morning for older adults and in the late afternoon and evening for younger adults (May & Hasher, 1998).
**Sex Differences**: Studies investigating sex differences in cognitive abilities and personality traits have found that reliable differences are rare and that, when differences occur, they’re relatively small. Sex differences that have been most consistently found include the following (Berk, 2013; Shaffer & Kipp, 2013): 
1. **Mathematical Abilities**: By adolescence, girls outperform boys on measures of computational skills, while boys outperform girls on measures of mathematical reasoning and have acquired more mathematical problem-solving strategies. 

2. **Verbal Abilities**: Girls obtain higher scores on many measures of verbal ability throughout childhood and adolescence, including speech fluency and reading and writing achievement. However, boys outperform girls on measures of verbal analogies. 

3. **Visual/Spatial Abilities**: Boys obtain higher scores on measures of visual/spatial abilities, especially on tasks requiring mental rotation. 
4. **Aggression**:  Research has consistently found that boys engage in more physical aggression than girls do as early as 2 years of age. However, studies have been inconsistent with regard to relational aggression, which involves engaging in behaviors that have the goal of harming social relationships by, for example, spreading rumors and social exclusion: A number of early studies found that girls engage in more relational aggression than boys do, but some more recent studies have found that boys engage in more relational aggression or that there are no significant gender differences. The inconsistency in research results has been attributed to several factors including the ages and cultures of research participants and the methods used to assess relational aggression (Merrell, Buchanan, & Tran, 2006; Voulgaridou & Kokkinos, 2015).

5. **Self-Esteem**:Studies investigating age, gender, and self-esteem have consistently found a gender gap, with self-esteem being higher among males than females beginning in late childhood and persisting until late adulthood. In contrast, the studies have found that the lifespan trajectory of self-esteem is similar for males and females: For both genders, self-esteem is relatively high in childhood, drops in adolescence, increases from late adolescence through middle adulthood, and then declines in late adulthood (Robins et al., 2002). Note that, while the gender gap in self-esteem and its lifetime trajectory are similar worldwide, there is evidence that the size of the gender gap varies across cultures (Bleidorn et al., 2016): The gap tends to be larger in countries that are individualistic, developed, and wealthy (e.g., United States, Canada, Netherlands) and smaller in countries that are collectivistic, less developed, and poorer (e.g., India, Indonesia, Malaysia).  Finally, research has also looked at the impact of race/ethnicity and gender on self-esteem. Studies conducted primarily in the United States have found (a) a “Black self-esteem advantage” among children, adolescents, and young adults, with Blacks having higher levels of self-esteem than Whites and members of other racial/ethnic groups and (b) higher self-esteem among males from all racial/ethnic groups (e.g., Rosenberg & Simmons, 1971; Sprecher et al., 2013). 

6. **Developmental Vulnerability**: Beginning at conception, boys are more vulnerable than girls to pre- and perinatal hazards and diseases and are more likely to have developmental problems such as autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, intellectual disability, and speech defects.  
The research has confirmed that sex differences in cognitive abilities and personality traits are not due solely to innate biological differences but are also the result of social and cultural factors, including gender-role stereotypes that create a self-fulfilling prophecy. For example, research on mathematical abilities has found the following: (a) Parents are influenced by gender-role stereotypes and expect sons to outperform daughters in math and attribute their sons’ successes in math to ability but their daughters’ successes to effort. (b) Children internalize their parents’ views, so that boys feel confident about their math skills while girls are more likely to underestimate and feel anxious about them. (c) Because girls believe they lack math ability, they tend to be uninterested in math and are less likely to take math classes and pursue careers that involve math.  

Finally, while gender stereotypes have declined somewhat in recent decades, gender-typing by parents often begins even before the birth of their offspring. When parents learn the biological sex of their infants prior to birth, they may prepare for the arrival of their infants by choosing gender-stereotyped clothing and toys and decorating their infants’ rooms in gender-consistent ways. Then, once their infants are born, parents perceive and treat sons and daughters differently, even during the first 24 hours after their birth (e.g., Renzetti & Curran, 1992). For instance, mothers and fathers often describe newborn daughters as being soft, delicate, little, and pretty or cute and newborn sons as being strong, alert, and well-coordinated (Lindsey, 2015). 
