# Early Influences on Development – Prenatal Development

**Early Influences on Development – Prenatal Development  

Stages of Prenatal Development:** Prenatal development is divided into three periods and three trimesters. 
1. **Periods:** The *germinal period* extends from conception to the end of the second week when the zygote (fertilized egg) implants on the uterine wall. Exposure to toxic chemicals, drugs, or other teratogens during this period ordinarily has an “all-or-none” effect:  If exposure causes significant damage, implantation will not occur. Alternatively, if implantation occurs, this suggests that exposure has had little or no effect (Hoyme & Manning, 2018). The *embryonic period* extends from the third through the eighth weeks. During this period, the major organs and structures are forming, and exposure to teratogens is most likely to cause major defects (VanMeter & Hubert, 2014). Finally, the *fetal period* begins when major organs and structures have formed, and it extends from weeks 9 through birth. During this period, organs and structures grow and mature, and exposure to teratogens is most likely to cause minor defects or abnormalities. An exception is the central nervous system, which is susceptible to major damage from teratogens during the embryonic and fetal periods. Note that the earliest age at which a premature baby can survive outside the womb is referred to as the age of viability and occurs between 22 and 26 weeks. 

2. **Trimesters**: The *first trimester* extends from weeks 1 through 13, the *second trimester* extends from weeks 14 though 27, and the *third trimester* extends from week 28 through birth.

**Chromosomal Abnormalities:** Chromosomal abnormalities include chromosomal deletions, extra chromosomes, and missing chromosomes.
1. **Prader-Willi Syndrome, Angelman Syndrome, and Cri-Du-Chat Syndrome:** All three of these disorders are due to a chromosomal deletion, which is a change in chromosome structure that involves the loss of one or more segments of a chromosome. *Prader-Willi syndrome* is most often caused by a deletion on the paternal chromosome 15. Its symptoms vary but often include a narrow forehead, almond-shaped eyes, short stature, and small hands and feet; hypotonia (poor muscle tone); global developmental delays; hyperphagia (chronic overeating) and obesity; hypogonadism; intellectual disabilities; and skin-picking and other self-injurious behaviors. *Angelman syndrome* is usually due to a deletion on the maternal chromosome 15. Its symptoms also vary and may include microcephaly (small head and brain), a wide jaw and pointed chin, severe developmental delays, communication and intellectual disabilities, hyperactivity, a tendency to be unnaturally happy, ataxia, seizures, and hand-flapping. Finally, cri-du-chat syndrome is caused by a deletion on chromosome 5. Its symptoms range from mild to severe depending on the extent and location of the deletion and include a high-pitched (cat-like) cry, intellectual disability, developmental delays, microcephaly, low birth weight, weak muscle tone, and characteristic facial features (e.g., widely set eyes, low-set ears, round face).

2. **Klinefelter Syndrome, Turner Syndrome, Rett Syndrome, and Fragile X Syndrome:** These disorders are due to sex chromosome abnormalities, with Klinefelter and Turner syndromes being due to an abnormal number of X chromosomes. *Klinefelter syndrome* affects males and is due to the presence of two or more X chromosomes in addition to a single Y chromosome. Males with this disorder develop a normal male identity but have incomplete development of secondary sex characteristics, gynecomastia (breast enlargement), and a low testosterone level. They also have disproportionately long arms and legs and are taller than normal, and they may have impaired executive functions (e.g., deficits in attention, cognitive flexibility, and working memory) and difficulties related to social interactions and communication. Research on social difficulties indicates they are related to social cognitive deficits that include problems related to theory of mind, face recognition, identification of facial expressions of emotion, and visuospatial processing (Tragantzopoulou & Giannouli, 2024; van Rijn et al., 2018). *Turner syndrome* affects females and is due to the partial or complete deletion of one of the X chromosomes. Females with this disorder don’t develop secondary sex characteristics and are infertile, and they have a short stature, stubby fingers, drooping eyelids, a receding or small lower jaw, and a web-like neck. They may also have learning disabilities, vision and hearing problems, skeletal abnormalities, heart defects, and kidney and urinary tract abnormalities. 

*Rett syndrome* (RTT) is an X-linked dominant disorder that is usually caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene and almost exclusively affects females. Infants with this disorder appear to develop normally during the first 6 to 18 months of life but then develop characteristic symptoms that include slowed head and brain growth, loss of speech, decline in cognitive and motor skills, abnormal hand movements, breathing problems, sleep disturbances, and seizures. Initial symptoms are often followed by behaviors associated with autism spectrum disorder (e.g., reduced eye contact, social withdrawal), a progressive decline in motor skills, and then stability or some improvement in social, communication, and cognitive skills. *Fragile X syndrome* (FXS) is also an X-linked dominant disorder, but it affects both males and females, with males usually having more severe symptoms. This disorder is due to mutations in the FMR1 gene and is the most common inherited cause of intellectual developmental disorder. Symptoms vary and may include a narrow face, prominent forehead, large ears, and other characteristic physical features; delayed speech and motor skills; attention deficits and hyperactivity; and behaviors associated with autism spectrum disorder (e.g., poor eye contact, social withdrawal, repetitive behaviors).

3. **Down Syndrome:**  Down syndrome is an autosomal disorder, which means it is caused by an abnormality on a chromosome that is <u>not</u> a sex chromosome, and it is the most common genetic cause of intellectual developmental disorder. There are three types of Down syndrome: The most common type is *trisomy 21*, which is also referred to as regular and standard trisomy 21 and accounts for about 95% of all cases of Down syndrome. It’s due to the presence of an extra 21 chromosome in all cells of the body so that each cell contains 47 (instead of the usual 46) chromosomes. *Mosaic trisomy 21* accounts for about 1% of all cases. It occurs when only some cells in the body contain an extra 21 chromosome. *Translocation trisomy 21* accounts for about 4% of all cases. It is characterized by 46 chromosomes in all cells of the body with some cells having a full or partial chromosome 21 attached (translocated) to another chromosome, most often chromosome 14. The symptoms of Down syndrome include intellectual disability (usually mild to moderate); hypotonia (decreased muscle tone); a short stocky build; a wide face, thick tongue, and almond-shaped eyes; developmental delays; and an elevated risk for vision and hearing problems, heart defects, hypothyroidism, and Alzheimer’s disease. 

With regard to etiology, trisomy 21 and mosaic trisomy 21 are both caused by an error during cell division. Also, older maternal age increases the risk of having a baby with trisomy 21 and possibly mosaic trisomy 21, with the risk increasing sharply after 30 years of age. (Research on paternal age and risk for Down syndrome has produced inconsistent results.) In contrast, the risk for translocation trisomy 21 is not affected by maternal age, and it can be due to an error during cell division or can be inherited from a parent carrier: When a parent is a carrier and has one child with translocation trisomy 21, there’s a risk that the parent will have another child with this disorder. In addition, relatives of a person who carries the translocation may also have the translocation and be at increased risk of having children with this disorder (Nussbaum, McInnes, & Willard, 2007). 

**Autosomal Dominant and Recessive Gene Disorders:** A number of disorders are caused by abnormal autosomal genes, with some disorders being caused by a single dominant gene and others by two recessive genes. *Huntington’s disease* is an autosomal dominant disorder, which means it is caused by a single autosomal dominant gene. When one parent has Huntington’s disease, a biological child of that parent has a 50% chance of inheriting the disease; when both parents have Huntington’s disease, their biological child has a 75% chance of inheriting the disease. (Additional information on Huntington’s disease is provided in the physiological psychology and psychopharmacology content summary.)  *Phenylketonuria* (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder, which means it is caused by two autosomal recessive genes. In other words, it occurs when a biological child inherits the PKU gene from both parents and, consequently, is homozygous with regard to that gene. When both parents are carriers of the recessive gene (i.e., they each have only one recessive gene for PKU), each of their biological children has a 25% chance of having the disease. A person with PKU is unable to adequately metabolize the amino acid phenylalanine. Consequently, treatment is a diet low in phenylalanine that begins soon after birth and is maintained through the lifespan (e.g., no milk, cheese, meat, fish, or eggs). Without treatment, the build-up of phenylalanine causes intellectual disability, hyperactivity, seizures, eczema, a musty body odor, hypopigmentation, and stunted growth.

**Teratogens:** Teratogens are drugs, diseases, and environmental hazards that cause developmental defects in the embryo or fetus. The effects of exposure to a teratogen depend on the type of teratogen, the amount of exposure, and the time during prenatal development when exposure occurs. With regard to time of exposure, the likelihood that exposure will cause major structural damage depends on the organ system but, in general, is from the third to the eighth week after conception. Note that there is evidence that some teratogens (e.g., valproic acid, alcohol, nicotine, DDT and other pesticides) exert their effects by causing epigenetic changes (Zhou et al., 2017).

1. **Prenatal Exposure to Alcohol:** Prenatal exposure to alcohol can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) which encompasses four disorders that involve abnormalities that are largely irreversible. *Fetal alcohol syndrome* (FAS) is the most severe disorder, and its symptoms include small eye openings, thin upper lip, and other facial anomalies; retarded physical growth; central nervous system dysfunction (e.g., intellectual deficits, slowed processing speed, hyperactivity); problems with the heart, kidneys, liver, and other organs; and hearing and vision impairments. *Partial fetal alcohol syndrome* (pFAS) has the same central nervous system dysfunction as FAS, but facial anomalies are less severe and retarded physical growth may or may not be present. *Alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder* (ARND) involves central nervous system dysfunction without prominent facial anomalies, retarded physical growth, or physical defects. *Alcohol-related birth defects* (ARBD) is characterized by heart, kidney, vision, and other physical defects without other prominent symptoms. Exposure to alcohol during any stage of prenatal development can have harmful effects. However, it is most likely to cause major defects when it occurs during the embryonic period (weeks 3 through 8) when organs and structures are forming most rapidly (Pinon, 2018; VanMeter & Hubert, 2014). 

2. **Prenatal Exposure to Cocaine:** Prenatal exposure to cocaine can cause spontaneous abortion during the first trimester, premature birth, and low birth weight. Cocaine-exposed infants tend to be irritable and overly reactive to environmental stimuli, often have a shrill piercing cry, and are difficult to calm and feed. In school, these children may have motor, attention, memory, and behavior problems; in adolescence, they may have difficulty with problem-solving and abstract reasoning tasks and are at increased risk for delinquency. However, the consequences of prenatal exposure to cocaine vary from individual to individual, and there’s evidence that the consequences are mediated by the amount and potency of the cocaine used by the pregnant mother and by exposure following birth to poverty, insensitive caregiving, and other risk factors that are associated with having a substance-abusing parent (Berk, 2013; Sigelman & Rider, 2018).
