# Early Influences on Development – Nature vs. Nurture

The *nature-nurture controversy* refers to disagreements about the relative roles of genetic and environmental influences on development. Most developmental psychologists agree that both play a role, but their theories differ in terms of emphasis. Some psychologists emphasize the stability of certain characteristics and stress the role of heredity; others emphasize the plasticity of some characteristics and stress the role of early experience (Berk, 2010).

**The Impact of Heredity:** There are three main mechanisms of inheritance (Sigelman & Rider, 2012): Single gene-pair inheritance occurs when a characteristic is influenced by a single pair of genes (two recessive genes or one recessive and one dominant gene). Sex-linked inheritance occurs when a characteristic is influenced by a gene on one of the sex chromosomes, most often the X chromosome. And polygenic inheritance occurs when a characteristic is influenced by multiple genes. Most characteristics – e.g., height, weight, hair color, intelligence, and susceptibility to cancer – are polygenic.
Heritability estimates indicate the extent to which variability in phenotype in a given population is attributable to differences in genotype: *Phenotype* refers to observed characteristics, which are due to a combination of genetic and environmental factors, while *genotype* refers to genetic inheritance. For instance, the heritability estimate for height is .80, which means that 80% of variability in height in the population is due to genetic factors, while the remaining 20% is due to environmental factors. Research has confirmed that heritability estimates vary for different populations and different environments. For example, intelligence is one of the most heritable traits, but it has been found to be affected by socioeconomic status (SES), with reported heritability estimates being about .10 for young children from low-SES families and .70 for young children from high-SES families (e.g., Turkheimer et al., 2003). The impact of SES on intelligence has also been confirmed by adoption studies showing that, when young children born into low-SES families are adopted into higher-SES families, the adopted children subsequently have higher IQ scores than their siblings who remained with their birth parents, presumably because the adopted children were provided with enriched environments, greater educational opportunities, and other advantages (e.g., van IJzendoorn et al., 2005). Moreover, there is evidence that the IQ of adopted children is affected by both moving up and moving down in terms of SES. Capron and Duyme (1989) compared four groups of children who were adopted soon after birth and whose birth families and adoptive families were either low or high in SES. They found that being adopted by high-SES families had a positive effect on children’s subsequent IQ scores, while being adopted by low-SES families had a negative effect: Children born into and adopted by high-SES families had the highest average IQ score (120) followed by, in order, children born in low-SES families and adopted by high-SES families (107), children born into high-SES families and adopted by low-SES families (104), and children born into and adopted by low-SES families (92).
**The Role of the Environment:** Some researchers interested in the impact of the environment on development distinguish between critical and sensitive periods. A *critical period* is a limited period of time when exposure to certain environmental events is necessary for development to occur. In contrast, a *sensitive period* is usually longer than a critical period and is a period of time when it’s optimal (but not necessary) for certain environmental events to occur. According to these researchers, sensitive periods are more applicable than critical periods to most aspects of human development. However, many contemporary researchers do not distinguish between critical and sensitive periods but, instead, use the terms interchangeably.

The impact of the environment is addressed by Bronfenbrenner’s (2004) ecological theory, which describes development as involving interactions between a person and his or her environment and distinguishes between five environmental systems: The *microsystem* is the child’s immediate environment and includes the child’s relationships with parents, siblings, friends, and others at home, school, and church. The *mesosystem* refers to interactions between elements of the child’s microsystem – for example, the influence of family relationships on the child’s relations with peers and teachers at school, and vice versa. The *exosystem* consists of elements in the environment that affect the child’s immediate environment and include the parents’ places of work, the extended family, and community health services. The *macrosystem* is comprised of the social and cultural environment. It consists of cultural practices, economic conditions, and political ideologies. The *chronosystem* consists of environmental events that occur over a person’s lifespan and impact the person’s development and circumstances. It includes such things as parental divorce and job loss, the birth of a sibling, and natural disasters. 

Finally, *fetal programming* “is the theory that environmental events in utero during sensitive windows of development can have permanent and long-lasting effects” (Pelch, Allison, & Nagel, 2011, p. 45-1). It is also known as Barker’s fetal origins hypothesis because it is derived primarily from the work of Barker and colleagues (e.g., Barker, Winter, Osmond, Margetts, & Simmonds, 1989) who found that undernutrition during prenatal development is predictive of an increased risk for coronary heart disease and type 2 diabetes in adulthood. According to Barker, undernutrition causes adaptations that sustain a fetus’s development in utero but permanently change (program) the structure and function of organ systems in ways that predispose the offspring to future health problems. Subsequent research has shown that prenatal exposure to other environmental factors is linked to increased risk for certain physical and mental health disorders and has identified mechanisms that are responsible for these links. For example, there is evidence that prenatal programming of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis may be the mechanism that explains the link between exposure to maternal stress in utero and the offspring’s increased risk for future cardiovascular, metabolic, and mental disorders (Howland, Sandman, & Glynn, 2017). 

**Hereditary and Environmental Influences on Personality:** Reported heritability estimates for personality range from about .40 to .50 (Maranges & Reynolds, 2020), which indicates that genetics and environmental factors both contribute to personality. The impact of genetics has been confirmed by studies comparing correlation coefficients for personality traits obtained by monozygotic and dizygotic twins who had been reared together or apart: Results of these studies have found that  (a) monozygotic twins are more similar than dizygotic twins in terms of personality, and (b) monozygotic twins reared apart are more similar than dizygotic twins reared together (e.g., Bouchard et al., 1990; Tellegen et al., 1988). Researchers interested in environmental factors that influence personality (and other traits) distinguish between shared and non-shared factors: Shared factors include parenting style, parental beliefs and values, and family socioeconomic status, while non-shared factors include differential treatment by parents, different interactions with siblings, and different experiences with peers and teachers. Contrary to what might be expected, studies have found that shared environmental factors have little or no influence on personality throughout the lifespan. In contrast, the influence of non-shared environmental factors is substantial and increases with increasing age, while the influence of genetics decreases with increasing age (Briley & Tucker-Drob, 2014; Plomin & Daniels, 2011).

**Hereditary and Environmental Influences on Intelligence:** 

The average heritability estimate for intelligence is .50, but the influence of genetics is affected by age, with reported heritability estimates being about .20 for infants, .40 for children and adolescents, .60 to .80 for individuals in early and middle adulthood, and .60 for adults over 80 years of age (Plomin & Deary, 2015). The influence of genetics on intelligence has been confirmed by twin, family, and adoption studies. For example, adoption studies have found that, even when children are adopted soon after birth, their subsequent IQ scores correlate more highly with the scores of their biological parents than the scores of their adoptive parents, with the correlation between adopted children and biological parents increasing with the increasing age of the children (e.g., McGue et al., 1993; Plomin et al., 1997). One explanation for the increasing influence of genetics on intelligence over the lifespan is that it is due to active genotype-environment correlation (niche-picking) which occurs when individuals actively seek experiences that “fit” their genetic predispositions. Finally, with regard to environmental factors, shared factors have a large influence on intelligence in early childhood, but their influence then decreases substantially during adolescence and early adulthood and stabilizes at a low level of influence during middle and late adulthood. In contrast, non-shared factors have a relatively low level of influence throughout the lifespan (Briley & Tucker-Drob, 2017). 

The following table lists the median correlation coefficients for IQ for people with different degrees of genetic similarity (Bouchard & McGue, 1981). These coefficients confirm that IQ is influenced by both genetics and environmental factors.

| Median Correlations for IQ Scores      |                                        |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Relationship                           | Correlation                            |
| Identical twins reared together        | .85                                    |
| Identical twins reared apart           | .67                                    |
| Fraternal twins reared together        | .58                                    |
| Biological siblings reared together    | .45                                    |
| Biological siblings reared apart       | .24                                    |
| Half-siblings reared together          | .35                                    |
| Adopted siblings reared together       | .31                                    |
| Biological parent and child (together) | .39                                    |
| Biological parent and child  (apart)   | .22                                    |
| Adoptive parent and adopted child      | .18                                    |

 
**Behavioral Genetics:** Behavioral genetics “is the study of the manner in which genetic variation affects psychological phenotypes (traits), including cognitive abilities, personality, mental illness, and social attitudes” (Chabris et al., 2015, p. 304). Investigators interested in behavioral genetics often rely on data collected in twin, adoption, and twin-adoption studies:  

*Twin studies* involve comparing the correlation coefficients for the trait of interest (e.g., intelligence, personality) for monozygotic twins who were reared together and dizygotic twins who were reared together. When the correlation coefficient for monozygotic twins is significantly larger than the coefficient for dizygotic twins, this confirms that genetics has a substantial influence on the trait. Note that twin studies are based on the assumption that monozygotic twin pairs and dizygotic twin pairs have similar environments and, consequently, the difference in correlation coefficients is due to differences in genetic similarity. However, the *equal environment assumption* has been challenged by research showing that the environments of monozygotic twins are usually more similar than the environments of dizygotic twins: For example, the studies have found that monozygotic twins tend to be treated more similarly than dizygotic twins by their parents. As a result of this problem, twin studies may overestimate the influence of genetics (Loehlin & Nichols, 1976). 
*Adoption studies* involve obtaining a sample of children who were adopted soon after birth and comparing the correlation coefficient for the trait of interest for the children and their biological parents to the correlation coefficient for the children and their adoptive parents. A larger coefficient for adopted children and their biological parents suggests that genetics has a greater impact than the environment on the trait, and vice versa. Adoption studies are considered to be more powerful than twin studies for disentangling genetic and environmental contributions to a trait because they do not depend on the equal environment assumption. 

*Twin-adoption studies* are viewed as even more powerful than adoption studies because they combine the strengths of twin studies and adoption studies. These studies involve comparing the correlation coefficient for the trait of interest for monozygotic twins who were reared together to the correlation coefficient for monozygotic twins who were separated shortly after birth and reared apart. If the coefficients are similar, this suggests that genetics has a greater impact on the trait than environmental factors do. If the coefficient for twins reared apart is substantially lower than the coefficient for twins reared together, this suggests that the environment has a strong impact on the trait.

**Heredity-Environment Interactions:** Explanations for the impact of genetic and environmental factors on development include the following: 
1. **Genotype-Environment Correlation:** Scarr and her colleagues (Scarr, 1992; Scarr & McCartney, 1983) have proposed that a person’s genetic make-up not only affects a person’s characteristics directly but also indirectly by influencing the environments the person is exposed to. Scarr distinguishes between three genotype-environment correlations: (a) *Passive genotype-environment correlation* occurs when children inherit genes from their parents that predispose them to have certain characteristics and are exposed to environments by their parents that support the development of those characteristics. For example, the children of sociable parents are likely to be genetically predisposed to being sociable, and their parents will provide them with many opportunities to participate in social activities. (b) *Evocative genotype-environment correlation* occurs when a child’s genetic make-up evokes certain kinds of reactions from parents and other people that reinforce the child’s genetic make-up. A sociable child will react to others in ways that encourage them to respond to the child in socially reinforcing ways. (c)  *Active genotype-environment correlation* is also referred to as niche-picking and occurs when children actively seek experiences that “fit” their genetic predispositions. Sociable children and adolescents will actively seek opportunities for social interactions.
Scarr also proposes that the importance of the three genotype-environment correlations changes over time: The passive and evocative types are most important in infancy and early childhood when children have little control over their environments, while the active type becomes increasingly important over time as children become more independent and able to choose their own niches. 

2. **Reaction Range:** According to Gottesman (1963), there’s a reaction range for certain traits that determines how people respond to environmental influences. In other words, genetic make-up determines whether the reaction range for a particular characteristic is broad or narrow. For example, a child born with a genetic defect that produces mild intellectual disability will have a broader range of positive outcomes from being provided with an enriched environment than a child whose genetic defect produces severe intellectual disability. The tendency for genetic make-up to restrict developmental outcomes regardless of environmental circumstances is referred to as canalization.

3. **Dynamic Systems Theory (DST)**: DST regards both nature and nurture to be essential for development. It’s based on the assumption that development is not simply the result of physical maturation but, instead, “is a complex process that involves the interaction of biology, environment, how we control ourselves and interact with others, and how we think about, or represent, our experiences in our minds” (Levine & Munsch, 2014, p. 57). Among the first advocates of DST were Thelen and her colleagues (Thelen, 1995; Thelen & Smith, 1994) who used it to explain the development of crawling, walking, reaching, and other motor skills. Based on the results of their research, they concluded that simple repetitive behaviors (“rhythmic stereotypies”) precede the emergence of voluntary complex behaviors: For example, kicking, reaching, and rhythmic rocking while on all fours precede and are integrated to become crawling when crawling is supported by the situation. In other words, crawling and other motor milestones don’t suddenly emerge as the result of brain and body maturation. They also concluded that, while major motor milestones emerge in the same sequence and at about the same age for all infants, the specific ways these milestone develop vary, depending on characteristics of the infant (e.g., perceptual ability, activity level), characteristics of the infant’s physical and social environment (e.g., physical barriers, social support), and the infant’s goals and desires (e.g., to obtain a toy on the other side of the room). 
 
4. **Epigenetics**: Epigenetics is “the study of changes in organisms brought about by modification of gene expression, rather than by alteration of the genetic code in the form of DNA” (Launer, 2016, p. 183). In other words, epigenetic mechanisms cause changes in phenotype without changing genotype by altering the function or expression of genes.  Epigenetic changes can be beneficial or harmful, and some are reversible. Several epigenetic mechanisms have been identified. One mechanism is DNA methylation, which involves “the addition of a methyl group, or a ‘chemical cap,’ to part of the DNA molecule, which prevents certain genes from being expressed” (Rettner, 2013, para. 2). A number of environmental factors have been identified as potential causes of epigenetic change: Factors that can trigger a change during prenatal development include maternal diet, use of teratogenic medications (e.g., certain anticonvulsants and antibiotics), viral and bacterial infections, tobacco smoking, and alcohol consumption. With regard to the latter, prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) has immediate toxic effects that result in cell death and persisting teratogenic effects that alter cell structure and function, which can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorders; increase the risk for anxiety, depression, and other mental health disorders; and increase susceptibility to diabetes, hypertension, and other diseases throughout the lifespan (e.g., Chung et al., 2021; Coles et al., 2022). Factors that have been linked to epigenetic changes that occur following birth include diet, exercise, trauma and stress, drug use, and environmental toxins. Finally, there is some research support for epigenetic inheritance, which occurs when epigenetic modifications in an individual are passed down to one or more generations of descendants of that individual (Klibaner-Schiff et al., 2024; Masterpasqua, 2009).
