# Language Development

**Language Development
Theories of Language Development.** Learning, nativist, and social interactionist theories are the major theories of language acquisition. According to *learning theory*, language development (like the development of other complex behaviors) is the result of imitation and reinforcement. In contrast, *nativist theory* proposes that humans are biologically programmed to acquire language. According to Chomsky’s version of nativist theory, humans have a language acquisition device (LAD) which is an inborn linguistic processor that enables children to understand language and speak in rule-governed ways. Evidence for Chomsky’s theory is provided by studies showing that all languages have the same basic underlying grammatical structure and that all children pass through the same stages of language acquisition at similar ages. Finally, *social interactionist theory* proposes that language acquisition depends on a combination of biological and social factors. According to this view, “native capacity, a strong desire to understand others and to be understood by them, and a rich language environment combine to help children discover the functions and regularities of language (Berk, 2013, p. 367). One source of evidence for the role of social factors is research showing that caregivers often use child-directed speech when talking to young children and that this speech facilitates language development (Bukatko & Daehler, 2012). Child-directed speech is also referred to as parentese and involves speaking slowly and in a high-pitched voice, using a restricted vocabulary and simple repetitive sentences, placing exaggerated emphasis on key words, and focusing on present events.

**Components of Language:** Linguists distinguish between five major components of language: (a) *Phonology* refers to the rules for using phonemes, which are the smallest units of sound in a language. Each language has a limited number of phonemes. English has about 50 phonemes (e.g., c, t, th). (b) *Morphology* addresses the rules governing the use of morphemes, which are the smallest units of language that have meaning. Free morphemes are minimal units of meaning that stand alone as words (e.g., test, certain), while bound morphemes must be combined with at least one other morpheme (e.g., pre in pretest, un in uncertain). As an example, the word “unspeakable” has 1 free morpheme (“speak”) and 2 bound morphemes (“un” and “able”).(c) *Syntax* refers to rules that determine how words can be combined into sentences. These rules sometimes vary in different languages. For example, in English, an adjective precedes a noun while, in Spanish, an adjective follows a noun. Syntax allows us to recognize that sentences with a different level of complexity and order of words have the same meaning: For instance, it allows us to recognize that “The client signed the consent form” means the same as “The consent form was signed by the client.” (d) *Semantics* is concerned with the meaning of words, phrases, and sentences and focuses on their literal meaning (e.g., the dictionary definition a word). For example, from the perspective of semantics, if a person says, “I’m so hungry, I could eat a horse,” this would mean the person actually wants to eat a horse. (e) *Pragmatics* refers to the use and meaning of verbal and nonverbal language in different social contexts. Pragmatic skills include adhering to conversational rules (e.g., turn-taking, staying on topic), using language that is appropriate for the listener or situation (e.g., using different language when talking to an employer or a child), appropriately using and understanding body language (e.g., gestures, facial expressions), and appropriately using and understanding non-literal language (e.g., idioms, slang, humor, sarcasm).

**Language Awareness:** Language awareness begins during prenatal development and continues to develop substantially during infancy and early childhood. For example, during the third trimester, fetuses can distinguish between their mothers’ voices and the voices of strangers as indicated by changes in heart rate and motor activity when their mothers speak (e.g., Karmiloff & Karmiloff-Smith, 2001). The studies have also found that newborns not only prefer speech sounds to other sounds but can distinguish between the vowel sounds of their native language (the language they heard during prenatal development) and those of other languages (Moon et al., 2013; Vouloumanos et al., 2010). In addition, infants as young as 12 months of age understand that language has a communicative function (i.e., transfers information to others) even when the language is not their native language (Vouloumanos, 2018). Finally, Genesee et al. (1996) found that bilingual children as young as 20 months of age were able to use their two languages appropriately so that their language matched the language used by both familiar and unfamiliar conversational partners: French-English bilingual children used more words of the mothers’ native language when speaking to their mothers, more words of the father’s native language when speaking to their fathers, and more words of a stranger’s language when speaking to a monolingual stranger.

**Crying:** Crying is the first way that infants communicate with their caregivers, and it’s possible to distinguish between three types of cries immediately following an infant’s birth: a low-pitched rhythmic cry that signals hunger or discomfort; a shrill, less regular cry that signals anger or frustration; and a loud high-pitched cry followed by silence (which is due to breath-holding) that signals pain.

The research has produced inconsistent results about the best way to respond to an infant’s crying: Bell and Ainsworth (1972) reported that, when mothers in their study responded quickly and consistently to their crying infants during the infants’ first few months of life, the infants cried less in subsequent months. In contrast, van IJzendoorn and Hubbard (2000) failed to replicate the Bell and Ainsworth study with a larger sample and found that, when mothers ignored their crying infants during a nine-week period, the infants cried less frequently during the next nine weeks. To reconcile these inconsistencies, some experts suggest that the optimal response depends on the severity of a distressed infant’s cries: “If a parent responds quickly to severe distress but less promptly to minor upset, the infant may learn to regulate the latter type of distress on his or her own and hence end up crying less overall” (Siegler, DeLoache, & Eisenberg, 2003, p. 73).

**Language Milestones:** The development of language involves the following stages:

1. *Cooing* begins at six to eight weeks of age and involves repeating vowel-like sounds (e.g., “ooo” and “aaaeeeooo”).

2. *Babbling* begins at three to six months of age with the utterance of single consonant-vowel combinations such as “ba” and “goo.” This is followed by canonical (reduplicated) babbling, which is the repetition of consonant-vowel combinations such as “mamamama” and “babababa.” Over time, infants exhibit variegated babbling which is more complex and consists of different consonant-vowel combinations in a single utterance – for example, “bamagubu.” A child’s babbling initially includes sounds from all languages but, by about 9 months of age, it narrows to the sounds and intonation patterns of the child’s native language. Infants who are congenitally deaf begin to babble at about the same time as or slightly later than hearing infants do. However, they babble less frequently, their babbling consists of a more limited range of sounds, and their vocalizations decrease and eventually stop unless they are provided with hearing aids or cochlear implants. When deaf and hearing infants are regularly exposed to American sign language (ASL) soon after birth, they begin to exhibit manual babbling at about 6 to 8 months of age. It consists of repetitive hand movements that replicate components of ASL (Petitto & Marentette, 1991).

3. *Echolalia* begins at about 9 months of age and involves repeating speech sounds and words uttered by another person without understanding their meaning.

4. Children are able to understand words by about 8 or 9 months of age but don’t say their *first words* to express meaning until 10 to 15 months of age. First words usually refer to familiar people and objects (e.g., “mommy” and “cup”) and actions such as “up” and “go.” Beginning at about 18 months of age, children exhibit a rapid increase in vocabulary, which is referred to as the vocabulary spurt.

5. Children begin to use *holophrastic speech* between 12 and 15 months of age. It involves using a single word to express an entire thought, with the meaning of the word depending on the context and the child’s tone of voice. For example, when a child says “juice,” she may mean “I want juice,” “I finished my juice,” or “I spilled the juice.” 

6. Children begin to use *telegraphic speech* between 18 and 24 months of age.  It initially consists of two content words (nouns, verbs, adjectives) and is also referred to as two-word speech. “Want juice,” “doggie gone,” and “good boy” are examples of two-word speech. Then, between 24 and 36 months of age, children use simple sentences consisting of three or four words – e.g., “I want juice,” “kitty is sleeping” and “Mommy go to work.” First sentences are usually declarative sentences which provide information (e.g., “I am coloring”), with interrogative sentences that ask a question (e.g., “Who did that?”) occurring later (Hoff, 2006).

**Critical Period for Language Acquisition:** Information about a critical period for language acquisition has been obtained from studies of children who were raised in social isolation and deprived of exposure to spoken language, children who learned second languages at different ages, and children who were deaf or hard-of-hearing and learned sign language at different ages. These studies have confirmed that there is a strong negative relationship between age of exposure to spoken or signed language and language proficiency. While some studies suggest that the critical period for first-language acquisition may extend into late childhood or early adolescence, others indicate that there are different critical periods for different aspects of language:  Full proficiency with grammar, syntax, and phonetics requires early exposure to language, while semantics and vocabulary size are less affected by age of exposure (e.g., Newport, Bavelier, & Neville, 2001). For example, Friedmann and Rusou (2015) found that the critical period for the acquisition of syntax in a first language is the first year of life. There is also evidence that, with regard to the timing and content of language milestones, the acquisition of spoken and sign language “show parallel developmental trajectories when the acquisition begins at birth” (Mayberry, 2010, p. 283). [Note that most investigators interested in language acquisition use the terms “critical period” and “sensitive period” interchangeably.] 

**Language Development in Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Children:** Experts agree that exposure to language from birth is essential for language development which, in turn, supports cognitive, socioemotional, and other areas of development. There is disagreement among experts, however, about whether the optimal exposure for deaf and hard-of-hearing (DHH) children is access to spoken language with cochlear implants or hearing aids, access to American sign language (ASL) or other sign language, or a combination of the two (Hall, Hall, & Caselli, 2019). While some professionals conclude that sign language may inhibit the development of auditory and spoken language skills (e.g., Geers et al., 2017), many others argue that the combined (bimodal-bilingual) approach is most effective. Professionals who endorse the combined approach point out that (a) studies finding that exposure to sign language has negative effects on the acquisition of spoken language are methodologically flawed, (b) cochlear implants and hearing aids vary in terms of their benefits for DHH children and can cause language deprivation, (c) cochlear implants are ordinarily not implanted until children are 12 months of age or older while infants can be exposed to sign language from birth, and (d) there is evidence that sign language benefits the acquisition of spoken language (e.g., Hall, Hall, & Caselli, 2019; Humphries et al., 2019). For example, Hall (2017) points out that there is evidence that non-signing children with cochlear implants can have significant language deficits compared to their hearing peers while children with cochlear implants who were exposed to sign language since birth obtain scores on standardized language tests that are comparable to scores obtained by hearing peers.

**Language Errors:**  At about two or three years of age, children make several language errors. *Overextension* occurs when a child uses a word too broadly. For instance, a child might use the word “doggie” not only to refer to dogs but to all furry, four-legged animals.  In contrast, *underextension* occurs when a child uses a word too narrowly – for instance, a child might use the word “doggie” to refer only to the family pet. Another common error is *overregularization*, which occurs when a child misapplies rules for plurals and past tense. For example, a child might say “foots” instead of “feet” and “telled” instead of “told.”
**Paralanguage**: Paralanguage refers to <u>how</u> something is said rather than to <u>what</u> is said and is often used to modify the meaning of what is said or to express emotion. Paralanguage may be expressed consciously or unconsciously and includes prosody, which refers to the stress, rhythm, tone, and intonation of speech. (Tone refers to a change in pitch for syllables or entire words and is usually used to express emotion. Intonation refers to changes in pitch over entire phrases or sentences. It is used to express emotion, mark the beginning and end of a phrase or sentence, and indicate whether a sentence is a statement or question.) Paralanguage also includes nonwords such as “huh” and “umm” and nonlinguistic sounds such as laughing, groaning, and sighing. Note that some authors describe gestures, facial expressions, and other types of body language as being part of paralanguage, while others use the term kinesics to refer to the types of body language that are used for communication.

**Language Brokering**: As defined by Morales, Yakushko, and Castro (2012), language brokering “is the act of translating and interpreting within immigrant families by children and adolescents for their parents, other family members, and other adults” (p. 520). Studies on the effects of language brokering have produced mixed results. For example, it has been linked to both positive and negative effects for the children and adolescents who act as language brokers: Positive effects include the development of strong interpersonal skills and high levels of self-confidence and academic self-efficacy; negative effects include elevated levels of anxiety, frustration, and embarrassment. Language brokering has also been associated with role reversals within the family that force parents to become overly dependent on the child and, in high-frequency language-brokering families, with greater parent-child conflict (e.g., Hua & Costigan, 2012; Umana-Taylor, 2002). 

**Code-Switching:** Code-switching refers to “bi- and multilingual speakers’ use of more than one language or language variety within a single interaction or conversational turn” (Tseng & Cashman, 2015, p. 1). Bi- and multilingual speakers are often unaware of their code-switching but, when they consciously use it, it is often for a specific reason. For example, they may use code-switching to compensate for a language deficiency in one language, foster rapport and solidarity, express an emotion or attitude, or strengthen or soften a request.
