# Brain Regions/Functions – Cerebral Cortex


**The Cerebral Cortex:** The cerebral cortex is the outer layer of the brain. It’s divided into the right and left hemispheres, and each hemisphere contains four lobes – frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital.

1. **Frontal Lobe:** The frontal lobe contains Broca’s area, the prefrontal cortex, and the primary motor cortex.
(a) *Broca’s area* is a major language area and is located in the dominant (usually left) frontal lobe. Damage to Broca’s area produces *Broca’s aphasia*, which is also known as expressive aphasia and nonfluent aphasia. People with this disorder have slow, labored speech that consists primarily of nouns and verbs. They also exhibit impaired repetition and anomia (an inability to recall the names of familiar objects), but their comprehension of written and spoken language is relatively intact.    

(b) The *prefrontal cortex* (PFC) plays an essential role in executive functions, which are also known as higher-order cognitive processes and include planning, decision-making, working memory (the aspect of short-term memory involved in processing and manipulating information), prospective memory (memory for future events), social judgment, and self-monitoring. It also contributes to several other functions including the regulation of emotions and motivation and the expression of personality. Summarized below are the functions and effects of damage to the major regions of the PFC and psychiatric disorders associated with abnormalities in each region (Alvarez & Emory, 2006; Hiser & Koenigs, 2018; Jackowski et al., 2012; Sari & Erbas, 2022; Schneider & Koenigs, 2017): 

(1) The *dorsolateral prefrontal cortex* (DLPFC) contributes to most executive functions, and damage can cause impairments in goal-directed behavior, concrete thinking, impaired judgment and insight, deficits in working memory, perseverative responses, and disinterest and apathy. The DLPFC has been found to play a role in major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and schizophrenia.

(2) The *ventrolateral prefrontal cortex* (VLPFC) is involved in goal-directed behavior, decision-making, memory, motor inhibition, and emotion regulation. Damage can cause impairments in decision-making and behavioral and emotional self-control. Abnormalities in the VLPFC are known to contribute to social anxiety disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. 

(3) The *ventromedial prefrontal cortex* (VMPFC) is involved in decision-making, social cognition, memory, and emotion regulation. Damage can produce impaired decision-making and impaired moral judgment, lack of insight, confabulation, deficits in social cognition (e.g., impaired facial emotion recognition, reduced empathy), and blunted emotional responses. Abnormal activity in the VMPFC has been linked to a number of psychiatric disorders including major depressive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, PTSD, and schizophrenia. 

(4) The *orbitofrontal cortex* (OFC) plays a role in emotion regulation, response inhibition, and social behaviors. Damage can cause impulsivity, social inappropriateness (e.g., immature behavior, inappropriate jocularity, inappropriate disclosure of personal information), lack of empathy, aggressive or abusive behaviors, and emotion dysregulation. Psychiatric disorders that have been linked to OFC abnormalities include major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, PTSD, schizophrenia, and substance use disorders. 

(c) The *primary motor cortex* is responsible for the initiation of purposeful movements and is active not only when people perform movements but also when they imagine performing them or watch another person perform them. The effects of damage to the primary motor cortex depend on its location and extent and range from weakness to paralysis in one or more muscles in the opposite (contralateral) side of the body.

2. **Temporal Lobe:** The temporal lobe contains the auditory cortex and Wernicke’s area. The auditory cortex is involved in processing sound, and damage to this area can produce auditory agnosia, auditory hallucinations, or cortical deafness. Wernicke’s area is a major language area and is located in the dominant (usually left) hemisphere. Damage produces *Wernicke’s aphasia*, which is also known as receptive aphasia and fluent aphasia. People with this disorder have impaired comprehension of written and spoken language, impaired repetition, and anomia. Although their speech is fluent, it contains many word substitutions and other errors and is devoid of meaning. (Note that the arcuate fasciculus connects Wernicke’s area to Broca’s area, and damage to this structure produces *conduction aphasia*, which is characterized by relatively intact comprehension with fluent speech that contains many errors, impaired repetition, and anomia.)

3. **Parietal Lobe:** The parietal lobe contains the somatosensory cortex, which processes sensory information related to touch, pressure, temperature, pain, and body position. Damage can cause one or more *somatosensory agnosias*, which include tactile agnosia (an inability to recognize objects by touch), asomatognosia (a lack of interest in or recognition of one or more parts of one’s own body), and anosognosia (denial of one’s illness).  Damage can also produce one or more types of apraxia (inability to perform purposeful, skilled movements that is not due to motor, sensory, or language impairment), contralateral neglect, and Gerstmann’s syndrome. Limb-kinetic apraxia, ideomotor apraxia, and ideational apraxia are types of apraxia that are usually caused by damage to the left (dominant) parietal lobe: *Limb-kinetic apraxia* involves an inability to make precise, coordinated movements using a finger, hand, arm, or leg; *ideomotor apraxia* involves an inability to imitate a motor activity or perform a motor activity in response to a verbal request (e.g., “pretend to comb your hair”); and *ideational apraxia* involves an inability to plan and execute a task that requires a sequence of actions (e.g., an inability to complete the steps needed to make a sandwich). *Contralateral neglect* is also known as unilateral neglect and hemispatial neglect and is usually caused by damage to the right (nondominant) parietal lobe and involves neglect of the left side of the body and stimuli on the left side of the body. Finally, Gerstmann’s syndrome is caused by damage to the left (dominant) parietal lobe and involves right-left disorientation, finger agnosia (inability to identify one’s own fingers), agraphia (a loss of writing skills), and acalculia (a loss of arithmetic skills).

4. **Occipital Lobe:** The occipital lobe contains the visual cortex, which processes visual information. Damage to this area can cause visual agnosia, visual hallucinations, achromatopsia (loss of color vision), or cortical blindness. *Cortical blindness* occurs when the primary visual cortex is damaged while the eyes and optic nerves are intact. When the visual cortex in only the left hemisphere is damaged, blindness affects the right visual field, and vice versa. Some individuals with cortical blindness exhibit *blindsight*, which occurs when they do not consciously see a visual stimulus but have appropriate physiological and behavioral responses to it (e.g., they reach for objects they claim they cannot see). When blindsight involves responding appropriately to an emotional visual stimulus without consciously seeing the stimulus, it is referred to as affective blindsight. As an example, patients with cortical blindness are exhibiting affective blindsight when they do not consciously see a photograph of an angry or happy face that is shown to them, but they correctly guess (above what would be expected by chance) whether they have been shown an angry or happy face (e.g., de Gelder et al., 2001). Finally, bilateral lesions in the occipitotemporal junction can cause *prosopagnosia*, which is characterized by an inability to recognize the faces of familiar people and, in some cases, one’s own face and/or the faces of pets and other familiar animals.

**Brain Lateralization:** While the right and left hemispheres participate to some degree in many functions, each hemisphere is dominant for some functions. For example, for about 95% of right-handed people and 50 to 70% of left-handed people, written and spoken language, logical and analytical thinking, and positive emotions are left hemisphere functions, while holistic thinking, intuition, understanding spatial relationships, creativity, and negative emotions are right hemisphere functions. Note that, while the left hemisphere is responsible for most language functions, the right hemisphere is essential for emotional prosody and pragmatics: Emotional prosody refers to the expression of emotion through variations in the intonation (manipulation of pitch at the level of phrases or sentences), tone (manipulation of pitch at the level of syllables or words), stress, loudness, rate, and rhythm of speech, while pragmatics refers to the use and understanding of language in different situational and social contexts (e.g., the use and understanding of humor, sarcasm, and hyperbole). There is also evidence that the right hemisphere is involved in identifying the basic sounds of language (phonemes) by infants learning their native language and adults learning a second language (Qi et al., 2019).  [The hemisphere that is dominant for language (the left hemisphere for the majority of people) is commonly referred to as the dominant hemisphere, while the other hemisphere is referred to as the nondominant hemisphere.]
In addition to differences in dominance, the left and right hemispheres differ with regard to their control of sensory and motor functions – i.e., for most functions, the right hemisphere controls the left side of the body and the left hemisphere controls the right side of the body. (An exception is smell: Odors that enter the left nostril are transmitted directly to the left hemisphere, and vice versa.)

Most of the initial understanding of brain lateralization was derived from research conducted by Sperry and his colleagues (e.g., Sperry, 1968) with *split-brain patients* whose severe epilepsy was treated by surgically severing their corpus callosums. (The corpus callosum is the main bundle of nerve fibers that allows the two hemispheres to share information with each other.) In one study, these researchers presented a picture of a spoon to the right visual fields of split-brain patients so that visual information about the spoon was transmitted only to their left (dominant) hemispheres. As a result, the patients could say that they saw a spoon and could pick out a spoon by touch with their right hands from a collection of objects that were hidden from sight, but they could not do so with their left hands. Conversely, when the researchers presented a picture of a spoon to the left visual fields of these patients so that visual information about the spoon was transmitted only to their right (nondominant) hemispheres, the patients could not say that they saw a spoon. However, they could pick out a spoon by touch with their left hands but not with their right hands.   

Subsequent research using the dichotic listening task, neuroimaging, and other techniques have provided additional information on brain lateralization. For example, the dichotic listening task is used to study speech lateralization and involves presenting two different words simultaneously, with one being presented to the right ear and the other to the left ear. Results of this research has confirmed that language is lateralized to the left hemisphere for most right-handed people: When asked to repeat what they’ve just heard, the majority of right-handed people repeat the word presented to their right ear which sends signals directly to the left auditory cortex.