# Nervous System, Neurons, and Neurotransmitters


**Nervous System:** The nervous system is divided into the central and peripheral nervous systems. The *central nervous system* (CNS) includes the brain and spinal cord. The *peripheral nervous system* (PNS) transmits signals between the CNS and the rest of the body and includes the somatic and autonomic nervous systems: The *somatic nervous system* (SNS) transmits information from the body’s sensory receptors to the CNS and from the CNS to the skeletal muscles. It’s responsible for actions that are usually considered voluntary. The *autonomic nervous system* (ANS) transmits information from the body’s smooth muscles and organs to the CNS, and vice versa. It’s responsible for activities that are usually considered involuntary, although some of these activities can be brought under voluntary control using biofeedback and other techniques.

The ANS is further divided into the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The *sympathetic nervous system* is responsible for preparing the body for action. For instance, during the body’s fight-or-flight response to an emergency, the sympathetic nervous system causes pupil dilation, sweating, and increased heart and respiration rates and inhibits digestion and sexual activity. In contrast, the *parasympathetic nervous system* is responsible for activities that govern rest and relaxation, and it causes the body to return to its pre-emergency state after a fight-or-flight response. Although the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems exert opposite effects on the body, they’re both active to some degree most of the time and work together cooperatively for some functions. For example, both play a role in the male sexual response: The parasympathetic nervous system is necessary for erection, while the sympathetic nervous system is responsible for ejaculation.  

**Neurons:** The nervous system contains two types of cells – neurons and glia. Neurons are responsible for communicating information within the nervous system, while glia serve several functions including providing neurons with structural support, insulation, and nutrients.
1. **Structure of the Neuron:** Neurons vary in size and shape, but all have one or more dendrites, a soma (cell body), and an axon. The dendrites receive information from other cells; the soma contains the nucleus, mitochondria, ribosomes, and other elements essential for the survival of the cell; and the axon transmits information to other cells. Some axons are insulated with myelin, which is produced by glia and speeds up the conduction of information through the axon. 

2. **Conduction Within Neurons:** The communication of information in the nervous system involves two processes – conduction within neurons and transmission between neurons. Conduction of information within neurons is an electrochemical process that begins when a neuron’s dendrites receive sufficient stimulation from other neurons. Prior to stimulation, a neuron is in a resting state, which means the fluid inside the cell is negatively charged relative to fluid outside the cell. However, when a neuron is sufficiently stimulated, channels in the cell membrane open, allowing positively charged sodium ions to enter the cell, which causes it to become depolarized (less negative). When stimulation reaches a minimum threshold, complete depolarization occurs and this triggers an electrical impulse known as an *action potential*. After an action potential occurs, the neuron returns to its resting state.
Note that action potentials are all-or-none responses, which means they either occur or don’t occur and, when they occur, they have the same intensity. Consequently, stimulus intensity is not encoded by the intensity of an action potential but, instead, by the frequency of the action potentials generated by a neuron and/or by the number of neurons that generate action potentials.

3. **Transmission Between Neurons:** The transmission of information between neurons is referred to as *synaptic transmission* and is usually chemical. It begins when an action potential reaches the axon terminal (the end of the axon). This causes the release of a neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft, which is the space between the axon terminal of the presynaptic neuron and the dendrite of an adjacent postsynaptic neuron. Neurotransmitters can have either an excitatory or inhibitory effect, which means they can either increase or decrease the likelihood that an action potential will occur in a postsynaptic neuron. Once a neurotransmitter has had its effect on a postsynaptic neuron, it’s inactivated by, for example, being absorbed by the presynaptic neuron or being broken down by an enzyme. 

**Neuroplasticity:** Neuroplasticity is also known as brain plasticity and “refers to the brain’s ability to modify, change, and adapt both structure and function throughout life and in response to experience” (Voss, Thomas, Cisneros-Franco, & de Villers-Sidani, 2017, p. 1). Four types of neuroplasticity have been identified by Grafman (2000): (a) *Homologous area adaptation* occurs when, in response to early damage to a particular area of the brain, the functions of that area shift to the corresponding area in the opposite hemisphere. A drawback of this type of neuroplasticity is that the pre-existing functions of the corresponding area may be negatively affected. As an example, when the right parietal lobe is damaged in childhood and the left parietal lobe takes over its visuospatial functions, the mathematical functions normally carried out by the left parietal lobe may be impaired. (b) *Cross-modal reassignment* occurs when a brain area that is responsible for processing a particular type of sensory input is deprived of that input and, as a result, the function of the neurons in that area changes. For example, neurons in the visual cortex of a child who was born blind do not receive and process visual input. As a result, these neurons may receive and process somatosensory input which, like visual input, allows the child to create cognitive representations of the physical world. (c) *Map expansion* is the temporary or permanent enlargement of a functioning cortical region as the result of practice or exercise and involves recruiting neurons from the borders of that region. This type of neuroplasticity often occurs when people are learning and practicing a new skill such as playing a musical instrument. (d) *Compensatory masquerade* occurs when person is no longer able to perform a task using usual cognitive processes that were mediated by a recently damaged area of the brain and, instead, begins using alternative cognitive processes that are mediated by an intact area of the brain. For instance, when people lose their spatial sense (sense of direction) as the result of a brain injury, they may rely on memorizing landmarks to get from one place to another.

**Neurotransmitters:**  Neurotransmitters are chemical substances that transmit information between neurons and are categorized as conventional or unconventional.  
* 		*Conventional neurotransmitters* are stored in synaptic vesicles at the presynaptic terminal, are released in response to a presynaptic action potential, and activate postsynaptic receptors. Included in this category are small-molecule neurotransmitters and neuropeptides: Small-molecule neurotransmitters are synthesized in the axon terminal, while neuropeptides are larger in size and are synthesized in the cell body and transmitted to the axon terminal. Dopamine, acetylcholine, and other major small-molecule neurotransmitters are described below. The neuropeptides include enkephalin and endorphin, which are endogenous opioids that have analgesic and euphoric effects.
* 		*Unconventional neurotransmitters* are not stored in synaptic vesicles but are synthesized on demand in response to a conventional neurotransmitter or other stimulus. In addition, they are released from various places in the neuron and may carry signals in the reverse direction – i.e., from a postsynaptic neuron to a presynaptic neuron. Included in this category are the endocannabinoids that bind to cannabinoid receptors, which are the same receptors that respond to tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active ingredient in marijuana. The endocannabinoids along with cannabinoid receptors and certain enzymes make up the endocannabinoid system (ECS) which helps maintain the body's homeostasis and is involved in many functions including immune functions and the brain's reward functions. Anandamide (the "bliss molecule") is one of the main endocannabinoids and plays a role in pain, emotions, memory, appetite, and sleep, and is involved in the rewarding and addictive effects of various drugs of abuse (Scherma et al., 2018; Siegel, 2021).
1. **Dopamine:** Dopamine serves both excitatory and inhibitory functions and contributes to movement, personality, mood, sleep, motivation, and reward. With regard to the latter, dopamine is released in the mesolimbic pathway (the brain’s “reward circuit”) during pleasurable activities, and elevated levels of activity in this pathway are responsible for the reinforcing (addictive) effects of alcohol, psychostimulants, opiates, and other drugs that increase levels of dopamine. Dopamine has also been identified as a contributor to several disorders. For example, a low level of dopamine in the substantia nigra has been linked to Parkinson’s disease, a low level in the prefrontal cortex has been linked to ADHD, and a high level in the caudate nucleus has been linked to Tourette’s disorder. In addition, according to the original dopamine hypothesis, schizophrenia is due to high levels of dopamine or hyperactivity of dopamine receptors, while a revised version proposes that the positive symptoms of schizophrenia are due to dopamine hyperactivity in subcortical regions of the brain (especially in striatal areas) and the negative symptoms are due to dopamine hypoactivity in cortical regions (especially in the prefrontal cortex).

2. **Acetylcholine (ACh):** ACh is both excitatory and inhibitory and is involved in movement, arousal, attention, and memory. With regard to movement, ACh causes muscles to contract, and myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disorder that causes muscle weakness by destroying ACh receptors at neuromuscular junctions. With regard to memory, low levels of ACh in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus have been linked to the early memory loss associated with Alzheimer’s disease. There are two types of ACh receptors: nicotinic and muscarinic. Nicotinic receptors respond to both ACh and nicotine and mediate rapid excitatory neurotransmission. These receptors are located in the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system, especially in the neuromuscular junction where they stimulate contraction of the skeletal muscles and in the autonomic ganglia where they mediate communication between the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems. Muscarinic receptors respond to both ACh and muscarine (a toxin found in mushrooms) and mediate both excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission. They are located in the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system, especially in the parasympathetic nervous system where they stimulate contraction of the smooth muscles and regulate exocrine gland secretion.
3. **Glutamate:** Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter and contributes to movement, emotions, learning, and memory. Excessive glutamate can result in “glutamate excitotoxicity” and cause cell damage and death. Excitotoxicity has been linked to a number of neurologic and neurodegenerative disorders including stroke, seizures, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease.

4. **Norepinephrine:** Norepinephrine is primarily an excitatory neurotransmitter but also has an inhibitory effect on certain receptors. It is essential for the sympathetic nervous system’s fight-or-flight response and is involved in attention, arousal, sleep, memory, and mood. According to the catecholamine hypothesis, some forms of depression are caused by a deficiency of norepinephrine while mania is due to an excess of norepinephrine. 

5. **Serotonin:** Serotonin is also known by its chemical name, 5-hydroxytryptamine (or 5-HT). It is primarily an inhibitory neurotransmitter but also has an excitatory effect on certain receptors. Serotonin plays a role in many functions including arousal, sleep, sexual activity, mood, appetite, and pain. Low levels of serotonin in certain areas of the brain have been linked to depression, increased risk for suicide, bulimia nervosa, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and migraine headaches. There’s also evidence that people with anorexia nervosa have higher-than-normal brain levels of serotonin that cause anxiety and obsessive thinking and that food restriction lowers serotonin levels which alleviates these symptoms (e.g., Kaye, Fudge, & Paulus, 2009). Finally, higher-than-normal blood levels of serotonin have been found in individuals with autism spectrum disorder and individuals with chronic schizophrenia who also have enlarged cerebral ventricles and/or cerebral atrophy. 

6. **Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA):** GABA is a primary inhibitory neurotransmitter and is involved in motor control, memory, mood, anxiety, arousal, and sleep. For example, higher-than-normal levels of GABA can cause memory impairment and daytime drowsiness, while lower-than-normal levels can cause anxiety and insomnia. Abnormal levels of GABA have been linked to a number of psychiatric disorders including major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, PTSD, schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorder.

**Neurotransmitters and Drug Effects:** Psychoactive drugs can be classified on the basis of their effects on neurotransmitters. (a) *Agonists* mimic or increase the effects of a neurotransmitter. Some authors distinguish between direct and indirect agonists: Direct agonists attach to receptor sites and act like neurotransmitters, while indirect agonists increase the availability of a neurotransmitter but do not attach to receptor sites. (b) *Partial agonists* produce effects that are similar to (but weaker than) the effects of a neurotransmitter. (c) *Inverse agonists* produce effects that are the opposite of the effects of a neurotransmitter or agonist. (d) *Antagonists* do not produce any effects on their own but block or reduce the effects of a neurotransmitter or agonist. They are also sometimes categorized as direct or indirect: A direct antagonist binds to and blocks receptors, thereby preventing a neurotransmitter from attaching to the receptors. An indirect antagonist prevents the production or release of a neurotransmitter by presynaptic cells.