# Psychopharmacology – Other Psychoactive Drugs


For the EPPP, you want to be familiar with the following psychoactive drugs:

Sedatives, Hypnotics, and Anxiolytics: The sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics include the benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and azapirones.  
1. **Benzodiazepines:** The benzodiazepines include diazepam (Valium), alprazolam (Xanax), and lorazepam (Ativan). These drugs increase GABA activity by acting as agonists at GABA receptors and are used to treat anxiety, insomnia, seizures, and alcohol withdrawal. With regard to anxiety, choosing between a benzodiazepine and an SSRI or SNRI involves considering their advantages and disadvantages: Benzodiazepines are fast-acting and are useful for providing immediate short-term relief from acute anxiety. However, these drugs have less impact than antidepressants on cognitive symptoms, and long-term use can lead to the development of tolerance and physical dependence. In contrast, SSRIs and SNRIs have a delayed onset of action and are most useful for chronic anxiety. However, they have less impact than benzodiazepines on physiological symptoms and have more unpleasant side effects.

The most common side effects of the benzodiazepines are drowsiness and sedation; others include weakness, unsteadiness, impaired memory and concentration, anticholinergic effects, sexual dysfunction, and, in older adults, disorientation and confusion. These drugs can have a paradoxical effect (especially in children and older adults) and cause excitability and anxiety, and chronic use can result in tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal symptoms, which may cause rebound anxiety and depression, anorexia, delirium, and seizures. Discontinuation of a benzodiazepine following long-term use requires gradual tapering to prevent symptom reemergence and severe withdrawal symptoms. The optimal tapering schedule for a patient depends on several factors including the benzodiazepine dose and half-life and how long the patient has been taking the benzodiazepine. For example, a longer taper is required for benzodiazepines with a short half-life (e.g., alprazolam, lorazepam). Finally, combining a benzodiazepine with alcohol can have a synergistic depressant effect that can be lethal, and combining a benzodiazepine with certain high blood pressure medications (e.g., central agonists, alpha blockers) can cause a dangerous drop in blood pressure.

2. **Barbiturates:** The barbiturates include thiopental (Pentothal), amobarbital (Amytal), and secobarbital (Seconal). These drugs enhance GABA activity and are used as a general anesthetic and as a treatment for anxiety, insomnia, and seizures. Side effects include drowsiness, dizziness, confusion, ataxia, cognitive impairment, and paradoxical excitement. Chronic use can lead to tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal symptoms, and sudden withdrawal can cause seizures, delirium, and death. Like the benzodiazepines, taking a barbiturate in conjunction with alcohol can be lethal.

3. **Azapirones:** These drugs include buspirone (BuSpar), which is used to treat generalized anxiety disorder and other anxiety disorders. Side effects include dizziness, dry mouth, sweating, nausea, and headache. An advantage of buspirone is that it does not cause sedation, dependence, or tolerance.
**Narcotic-Analgesics (Opioids):** The narcotic-analgesics mimic the effects of the body’s natural analgesics (endorphins and enkephalins) and include the natural opioids (opium, morphine, heroin, codeine) and synthetic and semi-synthetic opioids (methadone, oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl). Narcotic-analgesics are used as a pre-surgery anesthetic and to treat pain, and methadone is used for heroin detoxification. Methadone doesn’t produce the pleasurable effects of heroin, but it does reduce the craving for heroin and withdrawal symptoms. Side effects of the narcotic-analgesics include dry mouth, nausea, pupil constriction, postural hypotension, drowsiness, dizziness, constipation, and respiratory depression, and an overdose can cause convulsions, coma, and death. Chronic use leads to dependence, tolerance, and withdrawal symptoms. Initial withdrawal symptoms are similar to the flu (e.g., runny nose, watery eyes, nausea, muscle aches, fever, and yawning); these are followed by insomnia, abdominal cramps, vomiting, diarrhea, rapid heartbeat, and elevated blood pressure. Note that drug overdose is the leading cause of accidental deaths in the United States, with opioids being the most frequent cause of these deaths (Schiller, Goyal, Cao, & Mechanic, 2020).

**Beta-Blockers:** Beta-blockers inhibit the activity of the sympathetic nervous system and are used to treat hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, migraine headache, and essential tremor. These drugs include propranolol (Inderal) which is also used to treat anxiety, with research suggesting that it’s more effective for alleviating the somatic symptoms of anxiety than its psychological symptoms (e.g., apprehension, worry, dread). The side effects of propranolol include hypotension, decreased sex drive, insomnia, nausea and vomiting, dry eyes, dizziness, and depression. Abrupt discontinuation is contraindicated because it can cause rebound hypertension, tremors, headaches, confusion, and cardiac arrhythmia.

**Mood Stabilizers:** The mood stabilizers are used to treat bipolar disorder and include lithium and anticonvulsant medications.
1. **Lithium:** Lithium (Eskalith, Lithobid) is the first-line drug for acute mania and classic bipolar disorder (euphoric mania without rapid cycling). Common side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, a metallic taste, increased thirst, weight gain, hand tremor, fatigue, and impaired memory and concentration. Lithium levels must be regularly checked to avoid lithium toxicity, which can cause seizures, coma, and death.

2. **Anticonvulsant Drugs:** These drugs are used to treat acute mania and bipolar disorder with mixed episodes and include carbamazepine (Tegretol) and valproic acid (Depakene). Side effects include nausea, dizziness, sleepiness, lethargy, ataxia, tremor, visual disturbances, and impaired concentration. Blood levels must be monitored to avoid liver failure when taking valproic acid or carbamazepine and to avoid agranulocytosis (low white blood cell count) and aplastic anemia when taking carbamazepine.

**Drugs for Treating Alzheimer’s Disease:** These drugs include cholinesterase inhibitors and an NMDA receptor antagonist and are used to slow the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. The cholinesterase inhibitors delay the breakdown of acetylcholine and include tacrine (Cognex), donepezil (Aricept), rivastigmine (Exelon), and galantamine (Razadyne). All four have been approved for mild and moderate Alzheimer’s disease, and donepezil has also been approved for severe Alzheimer’s disease. (Because of the risk for liver failure and other serious side effects, tacrine is no longer commonly prescribed.) The NMDA receptor antagonist memantine (Namenda) has been approved for moderate to severe Alzheimer’s disease and is believed to exert its effects by regulating the activity of glutamate.

**Psychostimulants for ADHD:** Psychostimulants are the first-line pharmacological treatment for ADHD and include methylphenidate (Ritalin, Concerta), pemoline (Cylert), and amphetamine-dextroamphetamine (Adderall). These drugs increase attention and concentration and reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity in children with ADHD, but their effects on academic achievement when used as the sole treatment are unclear. There’s evidence that methylphenidate and other psychostimulants exert their therapeutic effects by increasing dopamine and norepinephrine activity in the prefrontal cortex (Arnsten, 2009). Common side effects are insomnia, nervousness, decreased appetite, weight loss, and abdominal pain. These drugs can also suppress growth in children, but this can be reversed with “drug holidays” during school vacations. Note that, while some college students and adults without ADHD use stimulant drugs to enhance cognitive functioning, there’s evidence that these drugs increase attention and positive mood but do not improve reading comprehension and fluency and may have negative effects on working memory and academic performance (Weyandt et al., 2018).

**Other Drugs for ADHD:** Second- and third-line pharmacological treatments are prescribed when patients with ADHD have an inadequate response to psychostimulants or are unable to tolerate their side effects, have significant comorbidities that interfere with treatment, or are at high risk for stimulant misuse. Second-line medications include atomoxetine (Strattera), guanfacine (Intuniv), and clonidine (Kapvay). Atomoxetine is a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor and is the most commonly prescribed nonstimulant drug for ADHD. It has been found to improve the core symptoms of ADHD and to be more effective than stimulants for patients with certain comorbidities such as a tic, sleep, or anxiety disorder or depression. Guanfacine and clonidine are both alpha-2-adrenergic agonists that were developed as treatments for high blood pressure. They improve the core symptoms of ADHD but are usually prescribed only when patients also have Tourette’s disorder or other tic disorder. Finally, several antidepressants are considered to be third-line pharmacological treatments for ADHD. These include the tricyclic desipramine (Norpramin) and the NDRI bupropion (Wellbutrin) which, like stimulant drugs, reduce symptoms of ADHD by increasing brain levels of dopamine and norepinephrine.

**Drugs for Substance Use Disorders:** Drugs used to treat *alcohol use disorder* include disulfiram (Antabuse), naltrexone (ReVia), acamprosate (Campral), and topiramate (Topamax). Disulfiram causes nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, tachycardia, a throbbing headache, dizziness, and other unpleasant symptoms when taken in conjunction with alcohol. Naltrexone reduces the pleasurable effects of and craving for alcohol, while acamprosate just reduces craving. Topiramate is an anti-seizure medication that has not been approved by the FDA for treating alcohol use disorder but is used off-label. Like naltrexone, topiramate reduces craving for alcohol and the pleasurable effects of alcohol.

Drugs used to treat *tobacco use disorder* include nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), bupropion, and varenicline. The use of NRT is based on the assumption that a stable low level of nicotine prevents the withdrawal symptoms that often trigger relapse when a person stops smoking. Bupropion was originally used to treat major depressive disorder but has also been found to prevent relapse following smoking cessation by reducing nicotine craving and withdrawal symptoms. Varenicline reduces nicotine craving, and there’s evidence that it also reduces the rewarding effects of smoking. Finally, no medication has been approved by the FDA for *cocaine use disorder*, and the research has not provided strong support for the effectiveness of any particular drugs. However, a recent meta-analysis found that there is some evidence that bupropion, topiramate, and several psychostimulants (e.g., modafinil, dextroamphetamine, mixed amphetamine salts) may be effective for increasing abstinence (Chan et al., 2019).

**Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC):** THC is the main active ingredient of cannabis and exerts its psychoactive effects by stimulating the release of dopamine in the ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens), which is an essential component of the brain’s mesolimbic dopaminergic reward pathway (Bossong et al., 2009). Dronabinal oral solution (Syndros) contains THC and has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of anorexia and weight loss for patients with AIDS and for chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting for patients with cancer who have not responded to other antiemetic treatments. 

**Psychedelic Drugs:** The U. S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has granted breakthrough therapy designations to two psychedelic drugs: a form of LSD as a treatment for generalized anxiety disorder and psilocybin for major depressive disorder and treatment resistant depression. Both drugs are serotonin agonists (i.e., they increase the effects of serotonin), but LSD also increases the effects of dopamine, and psilocybin also alters glutamate levels. Note that the FDA breakthrough therapy designation is not the same as FDA approval but is based on preliminary clinical evidence and accelerates the development and review of drugs as treatments for serious conditions.

**Psychopharmacology of Psychoactive Drugs:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with the following terms.
1. **Drug Half-Life:** The half-life of a drug is the time needed for the blood level of the drug to decrease to 50% of its peak level. It’s used to determine the time interval between doses: For drugs with a short half-life, the interval between doses is short, and vice versa. Note that anxiolytics, antipsychotics, antidepressants, and many other drugs have a longer half-life for older (versus younger) adults due to age-related changes in the metabolism and elimination of these drugs. As an example, the most commonly prescribed anxiolytics are the benzodiazepines, which are categorized as having either a short or long half-life. Benzodiazepines that have a long half-life are ordinarily eliminated from the body in 24 hours but, for older adults, elimination may take more than 72 hours (Eby, Molnar, & Kartje, 2009). Because of the increased half-life of many drugs for older adults and their greater sensitivity to the effects of these drugs, the rule of thumb when prescribing them for these individuals is to “start low and go slow” – i.e., to start at a low dose and gradually increase the dose until the desired effects are obtained. 

2. **Drug Tolerance and Cross-Tolerance:** *Tolerance* occurs when repeated use of a drug results in a gradual reduction in the drug’s effects, resulting in the need to increase the dose of the drug to produce the effect previously produced by a lower dose. *Cross-tolerance* occurs when tolerance to one drug produces tolerance to other drugs in the same class. For example, alcohol is a central nervous system depressant, and tolerance to alcohol produces tolerance to benzodiazepines and barbiturates, which are also central nervous system depressants. 

3. **Therapeutic Index:** The therapeutic index (TI) is used to measure a drug’s safety. There are several ways to calculate TI. In *animal studies*, the most common way is to divide LD50 by ED50 (LD50/ED50): LD50 (lethal dose 50) indicates the minimum drug dose that had a lethal effect in 50% of the test sample. A drug with a low LD50 is more lethal than a drug with a high LD50. ED50 (effective dose 50) is a measure of the drug’s effectiveness and indicates the minimum drug dose that produced the therapeutic (desired) effect in 50% of the test sample. In *human studies*, the most common way to calculate TI is to divide TD50 by ED50 (TD50/ED50): TD50 (toxic dose 50) indicates the minimum drug dose that had a toxic (harmful) effect in 50% of the test sample and ED50 is the same as it is for animal studies (Sarker, Sarker, Ghosh, & Sen, 2016). 
 
When a drug’s ED50 is the same as or higher than its LD50 or TD50, TI equals 1.0 or less, and the drug is said to have a *narrow therapeutic window*. Drugs with a narrow therapeutic window are not very safe and require close monitoring because the dose that produces the desired therapeutic effect is equal to or higher than the dose that produces a lethal or toxic effect. In contrast, when ED50 is lower than LD50 or TD50, TI is larger than 1.0 and the drug is said to have a *wide therapeutic window*. Drugs with a wide therapeutic window are most desirable because they are safer: The dose that produces the desired therapeutic effect is lower than the dose that produces lethal or toxic effects.