# Clinical Tests


**Neuropsychological Assessment:** 

1. **Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Battery:** The Halstead-Reitan is used to help determine the severity and nature of brain damage that is due, for example, to traumatic brain injury or a neurocognitive disorder. Versions are available for examinees ages 5 through 8, 9 through 14, and 15 and older. Its subtests include measures of memory, abstract reasoning, concentration, manual dexterity, and visual-motor integration, and it’s often administered in conjunction with a Wechsler intelligence test and the MMPI-2. The Halstead Impairment Index is derived by dividing the total number of subtests that indicate impaired performance by the total number of subtests. It ranges from 0 to 1.0, with a score of 0 to 0.2 indicating normal functioning, 0.3 to 0.4 indicating mild impairment, 0.5 to 0.7 indicating moderate impairment, and 0.8 to 1.0 indicating severe impairment. 

2. **Luria-Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery:** The Luria-Nebraska is used to evaluate neuropsychological functioning and consists of 11 scales that assess several aspects of functioning including reading, writing, arithmetic, expressive language, receptive language, and intellectual functioning. Versions are available for examinees ages 8 through 12 and 13 and older. All items are scored on a 3-point scale, with a score of 0 indicating normal performance, a score of 1 indicating borderline performance, and a score of 2 indicating impaired performance. Item scores are added to obtain raw scale scores, which are converted to T scores that are interpreted by comparing them to cutoff scores (critical levels), which are determined by the examinee’s age and education level.

3. **Boston Process Approach:** The development of the Boston Process Approach (BPA; Milberg, Hebben, & Kaplan, 1986) was based on the premise that obtaining qualitative information about how a patient solves problems presented by test items is more informative than the quantitative test score(s) the patient obtains. It is also known as the Boston Hypothesis-Testing Approach and is a flexible test battery that consists of a core set of tests that are supplemented with other tests that are appropriate for a patient’s neuropsychological symptoms. When using the BPA, standardized tests may be modified to address issues that arise during initial testing. For example, the examiner may “test the limits” by continuing to administer items beyond the ceiling (failure) level, giving the patient additional time to respond to test items, or providing the patient with cues that are not provided in the standard administration of a test.

4. **Bender Visual-Motor Gestalt Test, 2nd Edition:** The Bender-Gestalt II (Bender, 1938) is a brief measure of visual-motor perception and integration for individuals 4 to 85 years of age and older. It consists of 16 stimulus cards which contain geometric figures that differ in difficulty. Administration involves two phases – the *copy phase* during which the examinee is shown each design and asked to copy it “as best as you can,” and the *recall phase* during which the examinee is asked to draw as many of the designs as possible from memory. Use of the Global Scoring System involves evaluating the overall quality of each of the examinee’s designs on a five-point scale that ranges from 0 (no resemblance) to 4 (nearly perfect). The Bender-Gestalt II is considered to be a valid screening device for neuropsychological impairment, but it’s not sufficiently accurate for identifying personality characteristics or making psychiatric diagnoses.

5. **Benton Visual Retention Test, 5th Edition (BVRT):** The BVRT (Sivan, 1992) is used to assess visual perception, visual memory, and visuo-constructive skills for individuals 8 years of age and older. It includes ten cards that each contain one or more geometric figures, which the examinee is required to reproduce from memory. Scores are calculated for number of correct figures and number of errors. The BVRT has been found to be useful as a screening test for learning disabilities, ADHD, traumatic brain injury, and neurocognitive disorders.  

6. **Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST):**  The WCST (Berg, 1948) is a measure of abstract reasoning, perseveration, the ability to change cognitive strategies in response to feedback, and other executive cognitive functions. It’s available in three versions: the 128-card WCST and 64-card WCST, which are appropriate for individuals ages 6 years, 5 months through 89 years of age, and the 48-card Modified Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (M-WCST), which is appropriate for individuals 18 through 90 years of age. Administration involves asking the examinee to sort the response cards under the four stimulus cards using a sorting strategy that’s not disclosed to the examinee and giving the examinee feedback about whether his or her strategy is “right” or “wrong.” After the examinee makes several correct sorts, the examiner changes the sorting strategy without warning the examinee. The test provides several scores including number of correct responses, number of perseverative errors, and number of nonperseverative errors. The WCST is sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction, and poor performance has been linked to autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, and malingering. 

7. **Stroop Color and Word Test:** The Stroop Test (Stroop, 1935) assesses the degree to which an examinee can inhibit a prepotent (habitual) response in favor of a less familiar response. There are two versions: one for children 5 to 14 years of age and one for adolescents and adults 15 to 90 years of age. The test provides information on cognitive flexibility, cognitive processing, selective attention, and response inhibition and helps differentiate between individuals who have and do not have brain damage. Administration involves presenting the examinee with a list of color names that are printed in ink colors that differ from the name (e.g., the word yellow might be printed in blue ink) and requiring the examinee to state the color of the ink instead of the color name. The Stroop Test is sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction, and poor performance has been linked to ADHD, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and schizophrenia.

8. **Tower of London, 2nd Edition:**  The Tower of London (Shallice, 1982) assesses problem-solving, planning, and inhibition of impulsive and perseverative responding in order to evaluate frontal lobe functioning and is appropriate for individuals 7 to 80 years of age. It requires the examinee to replicate the configuration of colored disks on a pegboard by moving the disks on another pegboard, one at a time, according to specific rules. Several scores are calculated including total correct, total moves, total time, and total rule violations. 

9. **Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE):** The MMSE (Folstein, Folstein, & McHugh, 1975) is a screening test for cognitive impairment for individuals ages 18 to 85 years of age and is commonly used to screen for neurocognitive disorder in older adults. Its 11 items evaluate orientation, registration (immediate recall), attention and calculation, delayed recall, language, and visual construction. An examinee’s score on the MMSE is determined by the total number of correct answers, with the number of possible correct answers for each item ranging from 1 to 5. The maximum score is 30, and a score of 24 is usually used as the cutoff. Scores below 24 indicate cognitive impairment and, the lower the score, the greater the impairment. Because the MMSE relies heavily on verbal responses and reading and writing, individuals with hearing or visual impairments, limited English skills, or a communication disorder may obtain a low score even when they’re not cognitively impaired.   

10. **Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS):** The GCS (Teasdale & Jennett, 1974) is used to evaluate the level of consciousness in patients following an acute or traumatic brain injury and involves rating the patient in terms of three responses: best eye opening response, best motor response, and best verbal response. The total score ranges from 3 to 15 and is used to estimate the severity of a patient’s injury, with a score of 8 or less indicating a coma and severe injury, a score of 9 to 12 indicating a moderate injury, and a score of 13 to 15 indicating a mild injury. 

11. **Rancho Scale of Cognitive Functioning Revised:** The Rancho Scale (Hagen, 2000) is also known as the Rancho Los Amigos Levels of Cognitive Functioning Revised and is used to evaluate cognitive recovery during the first several weeks following a head injury. The revised version of the scale added two levels to the original version in order to provide better coverage of higher levels of functioning, and it involves rating the patient’s level of response and requirements for assistance in terms of 10 levels, with Level I indicating the lowest level of functioning. For example, a patient at Level I is unresponsive to stimuli and requires total assistance, while a patient at Level X makes purposeful and appropriate responses and accomplishes most tasks independently but may require more than the usual amount of time or the use compensatory strategies to do so. 

**Other Clinical Measures:**

**1. Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II):** The BDI-II (Beck, Steers, & Brown, 1996) is a brief self-report measure of the severity of depressive symptoms for individuals 13 through 80 years of age. It includes 21 items that address the mood, cognitive, behavioral, and physical symptoms of depression. Each item includes four statements that describe different levels of symptom severity and requires the examinee to choose the statement that best describes how he or she has felt in the past two weeks. The total score ranges from 0 to 63, with scores of 0 to 13 indicating minimal depression, 14 to 19 indicating mild depression, 20 to 28 indicting moderate depression, and 29 to 63 indicating severe depression.

**2. Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, 3rd Edition (Vineland-3):**  The Vineland-3 (Sparrow, Saulnier, Cicchetti, & Doll, 2016) is used to assess the adaptive functioning of individuals from birth to 90 years of age in order to assist with the diagnosis of intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, neurocognitive disorder, and other disorders; qualification for special education programs; and treatment planning. Information is obtained from parents or other caregivers and teachers, and it provides an Adaptive Behavior Composite score, scores for three domains of adaptive functioning (Communication, Daily Living Skills, and Socialization), and scores for optional Motor Skills and Maladaptive Behavior domains.

**3. Wechsler Memory Scale – Fourth Edition (WMS-IV; Wechsler, 2009):** The WMS-IV is a measure of visual and auditory memory that is often used to assess memory impairments due to various conditions including neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, traumatic brain injury, learning disorders, substance use disorders, major depressive disorder, schizophrenia, temporal lobe epilepsy, and multiple sclerosis. The WMS-IV includes an Adult Battery for individuals 16 to 69 years of age and an Older Adult Battery for individuals 65 to 90 years of age. For examinees 65 to 69, either battery can be used, with the choice depending on what is most appropriate for the examinee. 
Scores on the WMS-IV’s six primary subtests are used to derive scores on the following index scales: (a) The *Auditory Memory Index* (AMI) is a measure of immediate and delayed auditory recall. It consists of the Logical Memory and Verbal Paired Associates subtests for the Adult Battery and Older Adult Battery. (b) The *Visual Memory Index* (VMI) is a measure of immediate and delayed visual recall. It consists of the Designs and Visual Reproduction subtests for the Adult Battery and the Visual Reproduction subtest for the Older Adult Battery. (c) (c) The *Visual Working Memory Index* (VWMI) measures the ability to remember and manipulate visual information in short-term memory. It includes the Spatial Addition and Symbol Span subtests for the Adult Battery and the Symbol Span subtest for the Older Adult Battery. (d) The *Immediate Memory Index* (IMI) measures immediate recall of auditory and visual information and includes the immediate-recall items in the Logical Memory, Verbal Paired Associates, Visual Reproduction, and Designs subtests for the Adult Battery and first three of these subtests for the Older Adult Battery.
The WMS-IV includes a Brief Cognitive Status Exam (BCSE), which is an optional subtest that does not contribute to scores on the index scales. WMS-IV scores are reported as standard scores, with subtest scores having a mean of 10 and standard deviation of 3 and index scale scores having a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15. An index scale score of 70 or less indicates significant dysfunction. Because the WMS-IV and WAIS-IV were co-normed, an examinee’s performance on the two tests can be compared to answer specific questions about the examinee’s strengths and weaknesses. For example, an examinee’s scores on the WAIS-IV’s Perceptual Reasoning Index (PRI) and the WMS-IV’s VMI can be compared to determine if a low VMI score is consistent with or exceeds general visual-perceptual problems (Holdnack & Drozdick, 2010).

