# MMPI-2


**Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, 2nd Edition (MMPI-2):** The MMPI-2 is a measure of personality and psychopathology for individuals 18 years of age and older and is used to assist with diagnosis, treatment planning, and selecting applicants for high-risk occupations. It consists of 567 true/false items and provides scores on the original MMPI clinical and validity scales as well as restructured clinical scales, additional validity scales, content scales, clinical subscales, and supplementary scales. Raw scores are converted to T-scores that have a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10. T-scores of 65 and above are considered clinically significant, while scores near 50 are considered normal. For some scales, low scores (under 35 or 40) may have clinical meaning. The MMPI-2 is most commonly used to assist with the diagnosis of mental disorders and is ordinarily combined with other assessment techniques. For example, Widiger and Samuel (2005) propose that the best strategy for diagnosing personality disorders is to combine the MMPI-2 (or other self-report inventory) with a semistructured clinical interview and to begin with the self-report inventory to identify which personality disorders should be emphasized during the interview.

**1. Clinical Scales:** The original clinical scales were derived using *empirical criterion keying*, which involved administering a large number of items to eight clinical groups (hospital in-patients who had received specific diagnoses) and a non-clinical control group. Items that discriminated between the clinical and control groups were included in the appropriate clinical scales.
Each clinical scale is labeled with a number, an abbreviation, and a title. A brief description of the scales is provided in the following table:
| Clinical Scale                                       | Interpretation of Elevated Scores                    |
|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| 1 Hs – Hypochondriasis                               | preoccupation with physical complaints               |
| 2 D – Depression                                     | depression and hopelessness                          |
| 3 Hy – Hysteria                                      | stress and conflicts expressed as physical symptoms  |
| 4 Pd – Psychopathic Deviate                          | social alienation and disinhibition                  |
| 5 Mf – Masculinity/Femininity                        | stereotyped gender roles and interests               |
| 6 Pa – Paranoia                                      | suspiciousness and interpersonal sensitivity         |
| 7 Pt – Psychasthenia                                 | anxiety and excessive fear and doubt                 |
| 8 Sc – Schizophrenia                                 | psychosis and severe social and emotional alienation |
| 9 Ma – Hypomania                                     | unstable mood and hyperarousal                       |
| 0 Si – Social Introversion                           | social withdrawal and avoidance                      |

Clinical scale scores are interpreted in terms of single scale elevations (spikes) and code types (profiles). *Two-point codes* indicate the two scales that received the highest scores with the first number in the code being the scale with the higher score. As an example, a two-point code of 4-9 or 9-4 indicate that the examinee’s highest scores are on scales 4 and 9, which are Psychopathic Deviate and Hypomania. These two codes are interpreted in the same way and are associated with impulsive, narcissistic, and antisocial tendencies and substance abuse. And a two-point code of 2-7 or 7-2 indicates that the examinee’s highest scores are on scales 2 and 7, which are Depression and Psychasthenia. This profile is common in psychiatric populations and is associated with depression, excessive worry, agitation, and physical complaints. 

The conversion V, psychotic V, and neurotic triad are examples of *three-point codes*. The conversion V is also known as the conversion valley and occurs when an examinee obtains elevated scores on scales 1 (Hypochondriasis) and 3 (Hysteria) with a lower score on scale 2 (Depression). This code is associated with the expression of psychological problems as somatic complaints. The psychotic V is also known as the paranoid valley and occurs when an examinee obtains elevated scores on scales 6 (Paranoia) and 8 (Schizophrenia) with a lower score on scale 7 (Psychasthenia). This code is associated with delusions, hallucinations, paranoia, and disordered thought. And the neurotic triad occurs when an examinee obtains elevated scores on scales 1 (Hypochondriasis), 2 (Depression), and 3 (Hysteria). It has been linked to depression, somatic complaints, interpersonal and work-related problems, and general dissatisfaction.

**2. Validity Scales:** The MMPI-2 scales listed in the following table are used to determine the validity of an examinee’s scores on other scales.
| Validity Scale                                                                                                                                                | Interpretation of Elevated Scores                                                                                                                             |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| L (Lie): detects underreporting of symptoms                                                                                                                   | attempt to fake good, self-righteousness, denial, or poor insight                                                                                             |
| K (Defensiveness/Correction): detects underreporting of symptoms in more subtle way than the L scale does; used to correct scores on several clinical scales  | attempt to fake good, defensiveness, denial, or poor insight; may resist psychological evaluation and treatment                                               |
| F (Infrequency): detects overreporting of symptoms (infrequent responses in general population)                                                               | attempt to fake bad, excessive eccentricity, resistance to testing, significant pathology, or random responding                                               |
| Fb (F Back): detects overreporting of symptoms on last 197 test items                                                                                         | attempt to fake bad; random responding due to boredom, fatigue, or loss of interest                                                                           |
| Fp (Infrequency/Psychopathology): detects overreporting of symptoms (infrequent responses in psychiatric population)                                          | exaggeration of symptoms or severe pathology or distress                                                                                                      |
| S (Superlative Self-Presentation): detects  tendency to present oneself in highly virtuous way while denying problems                                         | defensiveness in one or more of five areas: belief in human goodness, serenity, contentment with life, patience/denial of irritability, denial of moral flaws |
| VRIN (Variable Response Inconsistency): detects random responding                                                                                             | invalid profile (responded inconsistently to pairs of items that have similar or opposite content)                                                            |
| TRIN (True Response Inconsistency): detects fixed pattern of responding (yea- or nay-saying)                                                                  | invalid profile (answered pairs of items that have opposite content in the same way)                                                                          |
| ? (Cannot Say): total number of unscorable (double-marked or unanswered) items                                                                                | reading problem, confusion, poor insight, or lack of cooperation                                                                                              |

Interpretation of the validity scales involves considering individual scales with elevated scores and certain combinations of scale scores. For example, with regard to the latter, when scores on the F and VRIN scales are both elevated, this suggests the examinee answered items in a random way since both scales measure this type of responding. However, when the F scale score is elevated and the VRIN scale score is low, this suggests the examinee has not responded in a random manner but has endorsed items that indicate actual or faked psychopathology. In addition, high L and K scale scores with a low F scale score suggest an attempt to present oneself in a favorable light and, for parents undergoing custody evaluations, is associated with parental alienation syndrome which occurs when one parent attempts to turn the children against the other parent.
**Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2-Restructured Form (MMPI-2-RF):** The MMPI-2-RF is a brief alternative to the MMPI-2 for individuals 18 years of age and older. Its 338 true/false items were derived from the MMPI-2 item pool, and it consists of 9 validity scales and 42 clinical content scales. The latter include the restructured clinical (RC) scales that were developed for the MMPI-2, higher-order (H-O) scales that assess broad areas of psychological dysfunction, specific problem (SP) scales that assess aspects of functioning not fully addressed by the RC and H-O scales, and personality psychopathology five (PSY-5) scales.
**MMPI-3:** The MMPI-3 is the most recent version of the MMPI and is appropriate for individuals 18 years of age and older. The goals in developing the MMPI-3 were to update MMPI-2-RF items, scales, and test norms. The MMPI-3 contains 335 true/false items and provides scores on 52 scales that include validity scales, restructured clinical (RC) scales, higher-order (H-O) scales, specific problem (SP) scales, and personality psychopathology five (PSY-5) scales. It provides updated English-language norms that match projected 2020 U.S. census data as well as a Spanish-language translation and norms.
**Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-Adolescent (MMPI-A):** The MMPI-A is a measure of psychopathology and personality for adolescents 14 to 18 years of age. It includes 478 true/false items and provides scores for the same clinical scales as the MMPI-2 as well as clinical subscales, validity scales, content scales, and several other scales. 
**Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-Adolescent-Restructured Form (MMPI-A-RF):** The MMPI-A-RF is a measure of psychopathology and personality for adolescents 14 to 18 years of age. It includes 241 true/false items and is similar in structure to the MMPI-2-RF.