# Stanford-Binet and Wechsler Tests


**Theories of Intelligence:** The major theories of intelligence differ in terms of how many abilities they identify and the organization of those abilities.
**1. Spearman’s Two-Factor Theory:** Spearman’s (1927) two-factor theory was derived from factor analysis and distinguishes between a general intellectual factor (g) and numerous specific factors (s). According to Spearman, performance on any cognitive task depends on general intellectual ability plus one or more specific factors that are required to accomplish the task.

**2. Horn and Cattell’s Crystallized and Fluid Intelligence:** Horn and Cattell’s (1966) theory describes intelligence as consisting of two major factors that are distinct but not entirely independent: *Crystallized intelligence* (Gc) depends on prior learning and experience and is important for tasks that require the application of acquired knowledge and skills – e.g., the use of verbal and numerical skills and recall of factual knowledge. *Fluid intelligence* (Gf) is the inherent aspect of intelligence. It represents the basic capacity to learn and does not depend on prior learning or experience. It’s important for tasks that involve forming concepts, solving unfamiliar problems, drawing inferences, and perceiving relationships. Research has found that both types of intelligence increase during childhood and adolescence but that fluid intelligence peaks before crystallized intelligence does. The reported ages at which the two types of intelligence begin to decline vary somewhat from study to study: However, there’s some consensus that fluid intelligence peaks between 30 and 40 years of age, while crystallized intelligence doesn’t peak until 60 or 70 years of age.

**3. Carroll’s Three-Stratum Theory:**  Carroll’s (1993) theory distinguishes between three strata (levels) of intelligence. Stratum III is general intelligence (g) which contributes to all other cognitive abilities; stratum II consists of eight broad abilities [e.g., crystallized intelligence (Gc), fluid intelligence (Gf), short-term memory (Gsm)]; and stratum I consists of numerous specific abilities that are each linked to one of the stratum II abilities.

**4. Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) Theory of Cognitive Abilities:** The CHC theory (Flanagan & McGrew, 1997) combines elements of the Horn-Cattell and Carroll theories. It is frequently modified based on the results of ongoing research, and the most recent version distinguishes between 16 broad cognitive abilities and over 80 narrow cognitive abilities that are each linked to one of the broad abilities. CHC theory has influenced the development of several new tests of cognitive ability and the revision of older tests (Flanagan, Ortiz, & Alfonso, 2013). For example, the theory was explicitly used in the development of the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test, 5th Edition, and the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children, 2nd Edition. Although it is not identified as the framework for the Wechsler IQ tests, research that contributed to CHC theory is cited in the manuals for the most recent versions of these tests. In addition, researchers have identified CHC abilities that are measured by Wechsler indexes and subtests. For example, as described by Flanagan and Alfonso (2017), (a) the primary subtests of the Verbal Comprehension Index of the WISC-V assess crystallized intelligence (Gc), with one subtest (Similarities) assessing both crystallized and fluid intelligence (Gf); (b) the primary subtests of the Fluid Reasoning Index assess fluid intelligence (Gf); (c) the primary subtests of the Visual Spatial Index assess visual processing (Gv); (d) the primary subtests of the Working Memory Index assess short-term memory (Gsm); and (e) the primary subtests of the Processing Speed Index assess processing speed (Gs).

**5. Das, Naglieri, and Kirby’s PASS Theory of Intelligence:** The PASS theory of intelligence (Das, Naglieri, & Kirby 1994) was derived from Luria’s research on the cognitive functions of different brain structures. It’s based on the assumption that intelligence is composed of four interdependent functions that interact with a person’s knowledge: planning, attention, simultaneous processing, and sequential processing.

**6. Gardner’s Theory of Multiple Intelligences:** Gardner’s (2011) theory is based on the assumption that all people possess at least nine intelligences that are mediated by different areas of the brain, are relatively independent, and vary from person to person in terms of strength: linguistic, musical, logical-mathematical, spatial, bodily-kinesthetic, interpersonal, intrapersonal, naturalistic, and existential.

**7. Sternberg’s Triarchic Theory of Successful Intelligence:** Sternberg’s (2005) theory proposes that intelligence is comprised of three interacting components that allow people to achieve personally meaningful life goals: *Analytical intelligence* is comparable to general intelligence (g) and consists of knowledge-acquisition and information-processing skills that are used to analyze, evaluate, and critique information. *Creative intelligence* is the ability to apply knowledge and information-processing skills to novel problems and unfamiliar situations. And *practical intelligence* is the ability to apply knowledge and information-processing skills to everyday tasks and situations. According to Sternberg, traditional intelligence tests focus on analytical intelligence and neglect creative and practical intelligence. 

**Flynn Effect:** Research conducted by Flynn (1987, 1998) and others found that IQ scores increased by about 3 points per decade throughout the 20th century in both developed and developing countries, with the increase being most robust for measures of fluid intelligence. Because of this “Flynn effect,” a person’s standard scores on an older IQ test with obsolete norms is likely to be higher than the standard scores the person obtains on a newer IQ test with updated norms (Lichtenberger & Kaufman, 2009). An implication of the Flynn effect is that psychologists must be careful when using IQ tests to assist with educational and legal decisions. For example, when using an IQ test to assist with the diagnosis of intellectual disability, it’s important to keep in mind that a client’s IQ score may be affected by the year the client was tested and the test norms used. 

Studies conducted in the 21st century indicate that the Flynn effect has plateaued or reversed in some countries and for individuals whose IQs fall within certain ranges. For example, Zhou and Zhu (2007) found a continuation of the Flynn effect in the United States for children and adults with IQs of 70 to 109 but a reverse Flynn effect (a decrease in IQ scores) for those with IQs of 110 and above. Researchers have concluded that the increases and decreases in IQ scores are due to environmental factors because the changes are too rapid to be explained by genetic factors (e.g., Bratsberg & Rogeberg, 2018).

**Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test, 5th Edition (SB5):** The SB-5 is a measure of intelligence for individuals 2 to 85 years of age and older. It is based on a hierarchical general mental ability (g) model that incorporates five cognitive factors derived from the Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) theory, with each factor being divided into nonverbal and verbal domains: The Fluid Reasoning factor assesses fluid intelligence (Gf), the Knowledge factor assesses crystallized knowledge (Gc), the Quantitative Reasoning factor assesses quantitative knowledge (Gq), the Visual-Spatial Processing factor assesses visual processing (Gv), and the Working Memory factor assesses short-term memory (Gsm).
| Cognitive Factor                                      | Nonverbal Domain Subtests                             | Verbal Domain Subtests                                |
|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Fluid Reasoning                                       | Object Series/Matrices                                | Early Reasoning, Verbal Absurdities, Verbal Analogies |
| Knowledge                                             | Procedural Knowledge, Picture Absurdities             | Vocabulary                                            |
| Quantitative Reasoning                                | Nonverbal Quantitative Reasoning                      | Verbal Quantitative Reasoning                         |
| Visual-Spatial Processing                             | Form Board, Form Patterns                             | Position and Direction                                |
| Working Memory                                        | Delayed Response, Block Span                          | Memory for Sentences, Last Word                       |

**1. Administration:** Administration of the SB5 begins with two routing subtests – Object Series/Matrices and Vocabulary – with the starting point for these subtests being determined by the examinee’s age or estimated ability level. Administration of the other subtests begins at a level slightly below the level indicated by the routing subtests, and the examiner identifies the examinee’s basal level for each subtest, which is the highest point at which the examinee answers all questions correctly for two consecutive age levels. Testing continues until the examinee reaches his or her ceiling level, which is the point at which the examinee misses 75% of the questions at two consecutive age levels.

**2. Scoring:** SB5 subtest scores have a mean of 10 and standard deviation of 3 and are combined to obtain four composite scores that have a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15: A Full Scale IQ is derived from scores on all of the subtests, a Verbal IQ is derived from scores on the verbal domain subtests, a Nonverbal IQ is derived from scores on the nonverbal domain subtests, and an Abbreviated Battery IQ is derived from scores on the two routing subtests and provides a quick estimate of an examinee’s nonverbal fluid and verbal crystallized cognitive abilities. 

**Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, 4th Edition (WAIS-IV):** The WAIS-IV is a measure of intelligence for individuals 16 through 90 years of age. The WAIS-IV is based on a hierarchical model of intelligence and provides a Full Scale IQ score and scores on the Indexes and subtests listed in the following table:
| Index                                                                                                     | Core and Supplemental Subtests                                                                            |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Verbal Comprehension (VCI)                                                                                | Core: Vocabulary, Similarities, Information<br/>Supplemental: Comprehension                               |
| Perceptual Reasoning (PRI)                                                                                | Core: Block Design, Matrix Reasoning, Visual Puzzles<br/>Supplemental: Figure Weights, Picture Completion |
| Working Memory (WMI)                                                                                      | Core: Digit Span, Arithmetic<br/>Supplemental: Letter-Numbering Sequencing                                |
| Processing Speed<br/>(PSI)                                                                                | Core: Symbol Search, Coding<br/>Supplemental: Cancellation                                                |

The technical manual for the WAIS-IV (Wechsler, 2008) notes that confirmatory factor analyses have generally supported the test’s four-factor structure, and it states that each factor is assessed by one of the test’s four indexes. However, several independent factor analyses have identified an alternative five-factor structure that corresponds to CHC abilities: For example, the analysis conducted by Weiss et al. (2013) found that the VCI, WMI, and PSI indexes correspond, respectively, to crystallized intelligence (Gc), short-term memory (Gsm), and processing speed (Gs), while the PRI index splits into two CHC factors: fluid reasoning (Gf) and visual processing (GV).

**1. Administration:** The start point for each WAIS-IV subtest is listed in the Record Form and test manual. For most subtests, when an examinee obtains a score of zero on one or both of the first two items administered, the reverse rule is used. This involves administering earlier items in reverse order until the examinee obtains a perfect score on two consecutive items. The discontinue rule for the subtests is either a designated number of consecutive items that receive a score of zero or a designated period of time.

**2. Scoring:** WAIS-IV subtest scores have a mean of 10 and standard deviation of 3 and are combined to obtain a Full Scale IQ score and four Index scores that have a mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15. Interpretation involves considering an examinee’s Full Scale IQ score, Index scores, and subtest scores to identify his or her normative and personal strengths and weaknesses. A General Ability Index (GAI) can be derived from the examinee’s Verbal Comprehension and Perceptual Reasoning Index scores and is useful when an examiner wants a summary score for an examinee that minimizes the effects of working memory and processing speed. 
Scores on the WAIS-IV for several clinical groups are provided in the test’s *Technical and Interpretive Manual* (Wechsler, 2008)*.* For the EPPP, you want to memorize which Indexes have the highest and lowest scores for the following groups:
| Group                                | Lowest Index Score                   | Highest Index Score                  |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Probable Alzheimer’s Dementia (Mild) | PSI                                  | VCI                                  |
| Major Depressive Disorder            | PSI                                  | VCI                                  |
| Traumatic Brain Injury               | PSI                                  | VCI                                  |
| ADHD                                 | PSI                                  | VCI                                  |
| Autistic Disorder                    | PSI                                  | PRI                                  |
| Mild Cognitive Impairment            | PRI                                  | VCI                                  |

You also want to know that a characteristic of nonverbal learning disability (NVLD) is a VCI score on the WAIS-IV that is significantly higher than the PRI score – or, on earlier versions of the WAIS, a Verbal IQ score that is significantly higher than the Performance IQ score (Mammarella & Cornoldi, 2013). This discrepancy has also been found in some individuals with high functioning autism (HFA) which is an unofficial term that is used to describe individuals who have mild symptoms of autism spectrum disorder and who would have previously been diagnosed with Asperger’s Syndrome (Williams, Goldstein, Kojkowski, & Minshew, 2008). (Nonverbal learning disability is not included as a diagnosis in the DSM-5 and is characterized by problems with mathematical concepts, understanding nonverbal communication, and motor coordination.)

Finally, the four indexes are affected differently by increasing age: The WAIS-IV VCI shows the least decline, with the score on this index increasing from adolescence to about 45 years of age and then remaining relatively stable until about 80 years of age when it begins to decline. The WMI score remains relatively stable from adolescence to about age 60 and thereafter declines, and the PRI and PSI scores begin to decline at about 30 years of age with the PSI having the greatest age-related decline (Lichtenberger & Kaufman, 2009). Consistent with these age-related changes, research using the WAIS-R found that Verbal IQ (which assesses crystallized intelligence) remains relatively stable in adulthood while Performance (Nonverbal) IQ (which assesses fluid intelligence) begins to decline at about 20 years of age. This difference in age-related changes in Verbal and Performance IQ in adulthood is referred to as the “classic aging pattern” (e.g., Botwinick, 1984).

**Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, 5th Edition (WISC-V):** The WISC-V is a measure of intellectual ability for children and adolescents 6 through 16 years of age. In addition to individual subtest scores, it provides a Full Scale IQ (FSIQ) score, five Primary Index Scale scores, and scores on several optional Ancillary and Complementary Index Scales. The Primary Index Scales are the Verbal Comprehension Index (VCI), Fluid Reasoning Index (FRI), Working Memory Index (WMI), Visual Spatial Index (VSI), and Processing Speed Index (PSI). There are 10 primary subtests, with each index consisting of two subtests. However, only seven primary subtests are needed to calculate the FSIQ. The Ancillary and Complementary Index Scales are used to obtain additional information about an examinee’s cognitive abilities and assist with the assessment of academic achievement and learning difficulties. 
For the EPPP, you want to memorize the lowest and highest WISC-V Index scores for the following clinical groups (Wechsler, 2014):
| Group                                                | Lowest Index Score                                   | Highest Index Score                                  |
|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| ADHD                                                 | PSI                                                  | VCI                                                  |
| Specific Learning Disorder - Reading                 | WMI                                                  | VSI                                                  |
| Autism Spectrum Disorder with Language Impairment    | PSI                                                  | FRI                                                  |
| Autism Spectrum Disorder without Language Impairment | PSI                                                  | VCI                                                  |

**Wechsler Primary and Preschool Scale of Intelligence, 4th Edition (WPPSI-IV):** The WPPSI-IV is a measure of cognitive development for children ages 2 years, 6 months through 7 years, 7 months. It provides subtest scores, a Full Scale IQ score, and scores on Primary Index Scales and optional Ancillary Index Scales. For examinees ages 2 years, 6 months through 3 years, 11 months, the test includes three Primary Scales: Verbal Comprehension, Visual Spatial, and Working Memory. For examinees ages 4 years through 7 years, 7 months, the test provides scores on these three scales plus Fluid Reasoning and Processing Speed Scales.
