# Family Therapies and Group Therapies


**Foundations of Family Therapy:** Most approaches to family therapy have their roots in general systems theory and cybernetic theory. General systems theory was originally used by biologists to describe the functioning of living and non-living systems. It predicts that all systems consist of interacting components, are governed by the same general rules, and have *homeostatic mechanisms* that help them maintain a state of stability and equilibrium. Cybernetic theory is concerned with the mechanisms that regulate a system’s functioning and distinguishes between negative and positive feedback loops: *Negative feedback loops* resist change and help a system maintain the status quo, while *positive feedback loops* amplify change and disrupt the status quo.

Communication theory was another important contributor to family therapy. Bateson and his colleagues at the Mental Research Institute were not only among the first to recognize the usefulness of general systems theory and cybernetics for understanding family functioning but also proposed that certain types of repetitive patterns of communication and interaction produce problematic behavior. For example, Bateson (1972) linked the development of schizophrenia to *double-bind communication*, which occurs when a person receives two contradictory messages from a family member and is not allowed to comment on the contradiction. Bateson also distinguished between symmetrical and complementary interactions: *Symmetrical interactions* reflect equality and occur when the behavior of one person elicits a similar type of behavior from the other person. Symmetrical interactions can escalate in intensity and become a “one-upmanship game.” In contrast, *complementary interactions* reflect inequality and occur when the behavior of one person complements the behavior of the other person. A common complementary pattern is for one person to assume a dominant role, while the other assumes a subordinate role. Problems occur in families when interactions between family members are exclusively symmetrical or complementary. 

Several recent approaches to family therapy are influenced by postmodernism which challenges the basic premises of general systems theory, including the premise that there are universal laws that govern systems and can be discovered by scientific research. These approaches adopt a constructivist or social constructionist perspective and assume that there are multiple viewpoints and realities. They view family therapy as a shared process in which the therapist forms a collaborative relationship with the family and helps family members identify alternative ways of interpreting and resolving problems.

**Specific Family Therapies:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with the following family therapies:

1. **Extended Family Systems Therapy:** Bowen’s extended family systems therapy is also known as intergenerational and transgenerational family therapy. Bowen derived his approach from work with children with schizophrenia and their families, which led to his conclusion that the transmission of certain emotional processes from one generation to the next is responsible for the development of schizophrenia in a family member. Terms used by Bowen to describe family functioning include the following:

(a) *Differentiation:* Differentiation is both intra- and interpersonal. The <u>intra</u>personal aspect is a person’s ability to distinguish between his or her own feelings and thoughts. This ability makes it possible for the person to separate his or her own emotional and intellectual functioning from the functioning of others, which is the <u>inter</u>personal aspect of differentiation. A person with a low level of differentiation becomes “emotionally fused” with other family members.  

(b) *Emotional Triangles:* According to Bowen, when a family dyad experiences tension, it may recruit a third family member to form an emotional triangle which helps alleviate tension and increase stability. For example, a husband and wife may reduce the conflict between them by becoming overinvolved with one of their children. The likelihood that an emotional triangle will develop increases as the levels of differentiation of family members decrease. 

(c) *Family Projection Process:* The family projection process refers to the parents’ projection of their emotional immaturity onto their children, which causes the children to have lower levels of differentiation.

(d) *Multigenerational Transmission Process:* The multigenerational transmission process is an extension of the family projection process and refers to the transmission of emotional immaturity from one generation to the next. It occurs when the child most involved in the family’s emotional system becomes the least differentiated family member and, as an adult, chooses a spouse or partner who has a similar level of differentiation. This couple then transmits an even lower level of differentiation to one of its children. This process continues in subsequent generations and eventually results in the development of severe symptoms in a child.

Bowen believed that increasing differentiation in one family member facilitates greater differentiation in other family members. Consequently, Bowenian therapists often see only two family members in therapy – usually the parents – or the individual family member who is most capable of increasing his or her level of differentiation. The primary goal of therapy is to increase each family member’s differentiation, and several strategies are used to achieve this goal: Therapy begins with an assessment that includes constructing a *genogram* that depicts family relationships and important life events for at least three generations and is used to help family members understand intergenerational patterns of functioning. During therapy, Bowenian therapists ask questions that are designed to defuse emotions and help family members identify how they contribute to family problems. They also teach family members how to interact with their families-of-origin in ways that alter triangulated relationships. Bowenian therapists assume the role of coach and stay connected with family members but remain neutral and avoid becoming involved in the family’s emotional processes. To reduce emotional reactivity, they have family members talk directly to them rather than to each other. 

2. **Structural Family Therapy:** Minuchin’s structural family therapy is based on the assumption that a family member’s symptoms are related to problems in the family’s structure, and identifies subsystems and boundaries as important aspects of a family’s structure: *Subsystems* are smaller units of the entire family system that are responsible for carrying out specific tasks. For instance, the parental subsystem consists of family members who are responsible for caring for the children. *Boundaries* are implicit and explicit rules that determine the amount of contact that family members have with each other. Boundaries differ in terms of degree of permeability and exist on a continuum: At one end of the continuum are boundaries that are overly diffuse and lead to enmeshed relationships; at the other end are boundaries that are overly rigid and lead to disengaged relationships. Midway between the two are clear boundaries that let family members have close relationships while allowing each member to maintain a sense of personal identity.

Minuchin identified four rigid family triads, which are boundary problems that help parents obscure or deny their conflicts: (a) A *stable coalition* occurs when one parent and a child form an inflexible alliance against the other parent. (b) An *unstable coalition* is also known as triangulation and occurs when each parent demands that the child side with him or her. (c) A *detouring-attack coalition* occurs when parents avoid the conflict between them by blaming the child for their problems. (d) A *detouring-support coalition* occurs when parents avoid their own conflict by overprotecting the child. 

For practitioners of structural family therapy, maladaptive behaviors are due to a dysfunctional family structure that causes the family to repeatedly respond inappropriately to developmental and situational stress. The primary goals of therapy are to alleviate current symptoms and change the family structure by altering coalitions and creating clear boundaries. Therapy focuses on promoting behavior change rather than insight and consists of three overlapping phases – joining, evaluating, and intervening: (a) *Joining* is used by a therapist to establish a therapeutic alliance with the family and relies on three techniques: Mimesis involves adopting the family’s affective, behavioral, and communication style; tracking involves adopting the content of the family’s communications; and maintenance entails providing family members with support. (b) A therapist’s next task is to evaluate the family’s structure to make a structural diagnosis and identify appropriate interventions. Evaluation includes constructing a *family map* that depicts the family’s subsystems, boundaries, and other aspects of the family’s structure. (c) The therapist then uses reframing, unbalancing, boundary making, enactment, and other interventions to achieve therapy goals: *Reframing* involves relabeling a problematic behavior so it can be viewed in a more constructive way. *Unbalancing* is used to alter hierarchical relationships and occurs when the therapist aligns with a family member whose level of power needs to be increased. *Boundary making* is used to alter the degree of proximity between family members. And *enactment* involves asking family members to role-play a problematic interaction so the therapist can obtain information about the interaction and then encourage family members to interact in an alternative way. 

3. **Strategic Family Therapy:** Haley’s strategic family therapy is based on the assumptions that struggles for power and control in relationships are core features of family functioning and that “a symptom is a strategy that is adaptive to a current social situation for controlling a relationship when all other strategies have failed (Goldenberg & Goldenberg, 2013, p. 317). It also assumes that power and control are determined primarily by hierarchies within a family and that maladaptive family functioning is often related to unclear or inappropriate hierarchies.  

The primary goal of therapy is to alter family interactions that are maintaining its symptoms. To achieve this goal, strategic family therapists assume an active role and use a variety of strategies that are aimed at changing behavior rather than instilling insight. The initial session is highly structured and consists of four stages: During a brief *social stage*, the therapist welcomes the family and observes the family’s interactions. Next is the *problem stage*, in which the therapist elicits each family member’s view of the family problem and its causes. In the *interactional stage*, family members discuss their different views of the family’s problem, and the therapist observes how family members interact when addressing the problem. In the final *goal-setting stage,* the therapist helps family members agree on a definition of the family’s problem and concrete therapy goals that target the problem.

During subsequent sessions, the therapist uses a combination of straightforward and paradoxical directives. Straightforward directives are instructions to engage in specific behaviors that will change how family members interact. Paradoxical directives help family members realize that they have control over problematic behavior or use the resistance of family members to help them change in the desired way. They include prescribing the symptom, restraining, and ordeals: *Prescribing the symptom* involves instructing family members to engage in the problematic behavior, often in an exaggerated way. *Restraining* involves encouraging family members not to change or warning them not to change too quickly. And an *ordeal* is an unpleasant task that a family member is asked to perform whenever he or she engages in the undesirable behavior.

4. **Milan Systemic Family Therapy:** Milan systemic family therapy is based on the assumption that “the family as a whole protects itself from change through homeostatic rules and patterns of communication” (Browning & Green, 2003, p. 69). Patterns of communication are referred to as family games, and family games associated with problematic behaviors are rigid, involve power struggles between family members, and are known as “dirty games.” Leading contributors to systemic family therapy include Salvini-Palazzoli, Boscolo, Ceechin, and Prata. 

The primary goal of therapy is to alter the family rules and communication patterns that are maintaining problematic behavior. This involves providing the family with information that challenges family games and helps family members develop communication patterns that increase the family’s ability to adapt to change. Milan systemic family therapy is distinguished from other family therapies by its use of a therapeutic team and five-part therapy sessions (pre-session, session, intersession, intervention, and post-session) and gaps between therapy sessions of four to six weeks. Strategies include hypothesizing, neutrality, circular questioning, positive connotation, and family rituals: *Hypothesizing* is “a continual interactive process of speculating and making assumptions about the family situation” (Adams, 2003, p. 125). The first hypotheses are based on information obtained in the initial telephone interview, and hypotheses are modified during therapy as new information about the family’s functioning is acquired. *Neutrality* refers to the therapist’s interest in the family’s situation and acceptance of each family member’s perception of the problem. *Circular questioning* involves asking each family member the same question to identify differences in perceptions about events and relationships and uncover family communication patterns. For example, a therapist might ask each member, “When mom is depressed, what does Dad do?” *Positive connotation* is a type of reframing that helps family members view a symptom as beneficial because it maintains the family’s cohesion and well-being. Its purpose is to change the family’s perception of a symptom from an individual family member’s illness to, instead, a behavior that’s voluntarily controlled and well-intentioned and involves the entire family system. *Family rituals* are activities that are carried out by family members between sessions and are designed to alter problematic family games. For example, when parents are competitive in their control of children’s behaviors or family events, the therapist might instruct the mother to make all family decisions on odd-numbered days and the father to make all family decisions on even-numbered days.

5. **Conjoint Family Therapy**: Satir’s (1983, 1988) conjoint family therapy is also known as the human validation process model and was influenced by humanistic psychology and communication and experiential approaches to family therapy. According to Satir, family systems seek a state of balance, with family problems arising when balance is maintained by unrealistic expectations, inappropriate rules and roles, and dysfunctional communication. With regard to the latter, Satir distinguished between four dysfunctional communication styles: *Placating* involves agreeing with or capitulating to others due to fear, dependency, and a desire to be loved and accepted. *Blaming* involves accusing, judging, and bullying others to avoid taking responsibility and to hide feelings of vulnerability and worthlessness. *Computing* involves taking an overly intellectual and rational (super-reasonable) approach to avoid becoming emotionally engaged with others. *Distracting* involves changing the subject and making inappropriate jokes to distract attention and avoid conflict. Satir also identified a *congruent (or leveling) style*, which is a functional style that’s characterized by congruence between verbal and nonverbal messages, directness and authenticity, and emotional engagement with others. 

The primary goal of conjoint family therapy is to enhance the growth potential of family members by increasing their self-esteem, strengthening their problem-solving skills, and helping them communicate congruently. Satir viewed the therapist’s “use of the self” as the most important therapeutic tool and proposed that therapists have multiple roles when working with clients, including facilitator, mediator, advocate, educator, and role model. She also used several techniques to achieve therapy goals, including family sculpting (which involves having each family member take a turn positioning other family members in ways that depict his/her view of family relationships) and family reconstruction (which is a type of psychodrama that involves role-playing three generations of the family to explore unresolved family issues and events).

6. **Narrative Family Therapy:** Practitioners of narrative family therapy consider a person’s problems “as arising from, and being maintained by, oppressive stories which dominate the person’s life” (Carr, 2012, p. 141), and they view these stories as being socially constructed. They also assume that the problem – not the person – is the problem. In other words, the problem is not internal to the person but is something that exists outside the person. For example, instead of saying that a family member is depressed, a narrative family therapist would say that depression sometimes causes problems for the person. The leading contributors to narrative family therapy include White and Epston.

The primary goal of narrative family therapy is to replace problem-saturated stories with alternative stories that support more satisfying and preferred outcomes. The process of therapy varies somewhat among practitioners but generally involves the following stages (Gehart, 2014): (a) Meeting family members involves getting to know them separate from their problems by asking them about their interests and everyday activities. (b) Listening involves paying attention to what family members say to identify dominant discourses and unique outcomes, which are also known as “sparkling moments” and are experiences that are not consistent with problem-saturated stories. (c) Separating family members from their problems involves externalizing the problems. (d) Enacting preferred narratives involves identifying alternative stories that lead to more satisfying realities and identities. (e) Solidifying involves strengthening alternative stories by, for example, writing letters of support to family members and expanding the family’s network of social relationships to include individuals who will support its new stories.

A narrative family therapist assumes the role of collaborator and uses questions and other techniques to help family members identify current stories and construct alternative, healthier ones: For instance, *externalizing questions* are used to help clients view their problems as being outside themselves, while *opening space questions* help family members identify unique outcomes. Asking a family member what his anger tells him to do is an example of an externalizing question, and asking family members if there have ever been times when conflicts didn’t control their lives is an example of an opening space question. Other interventions include therapeutic letters, therapeutic certificates, and definitional ceremonies: The therapist writes therapeutic letters to family members to reinforce their emerging alternative stories. Therapeutic certificates are given to family members toward the end of therapy to acknowledge their accomplishments. And definitional ceremonies provide family members with opportunities to tell others how they overcame their problems and celebrate the changes they’ve made in their lives. 

7. **Emotionally Focused Therapy:**  Emotionally focused therapy (EFT; Johnson & Greenberg, 1987) is a brief evidence-based treatment that integrates principles of attachment theory, humanistic-experiential approaches, and systems theory. It was originally developed as a treatment for couples but has also been applied to families and individuals. As a couple’s intervention, EFT was designed to help emotionally distressed partners who want to strengthen their relationship and stay together. EFT for couples is contraindicated when the partners have different agendas for their relationship or therapy, when the therapist believes that emotional vulnerability is not safe or advisable (e.g., when there is ongoing physical abuse in the relationship), or when a partner has an untreated substance use disorder. (Note that the terms “emotionally focused therapy” and “emotion-focused therapy” are sometimes used interchangeably but that the two differ, with the latter referring to various therapies that emphasize emotion as the target of change.)
EFT is based on the assumptions that (a) emotions are essential to the organization of attachment behaviors and influence how people experience themselves and their partners in intimate relationships, (b) the attachment needs of partners are essentially healthy and adaptive but problems arise when needs are enacted in the context of attachment-related insecurities, and (c) relationship distress is maintained by the ways in which interactions between partners are organized and by the dominant emotional experiences of each partner (Johnson & Denton, 2002). Practitioners of EFT assume that helping partners express and deal with their emotions is the fastest and most effective way to solve problems, and the primary goal of therapy is to expand and restructure the emotional experiences partners have with each other so they can develop new interactional patterns and experience attachment security within their current relationship. Therapy involves three stages: assessment and cycle de-escalation, changing interactional positions and creating new bonding events, and consolidation and integration.

The potential usefulness of eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) in couples therapy was first addressed by Shapiro (2001), and it has subsequently been integrated into several approaches to couple therapy including EFT. For example, Eberro and Sommers-Flanagan (2007) have described how EMDR and EFT can be combined as a treatment for couples who were affected by war trauma, and Knox (2015) conducted a study to investigate the effectiveness of the combined treatment for members of this population. His study involved comparing outcomes for couples who received EFT only, EMDR only, combined EFT and EMDR, or no treatment. Knox found that couples in the combined EFT and EMDR group experienced the greatest improvement in marital satisfaction and attachment security, while those in the EMDR only group had the greatest reduction in posttraumatic symptoms.

8. **Functional Family Therapy:** Functional family therapy (FFT) is an evidence-based treatment for at-risk adolescents (e.g., those who have conduct disorder and/or a substance use disorder) and their families. It incorporates elements of structural, strategic, and behavioral family therapy, and it is based on the assumption that problematic behaviors within a family serve important relationship functions – i.e., they regulate interpersonal connections and relational hierarchies. Consequently, the primary goal of FFT is to replace problematic behaviors with nonproblematic behaviors that fulfill the same relationship functions. Therapy ordinarily involves 8 to 30 sessions over a 3- to 6-month period, and it consists of three stages (Sexton & Alexander, 2005) : During the *engagement and motivation stage*, emphasis is on forming a therapeutic alliance with family members and helping family members reduce feelings of hopelessness and negativity, increase positive expectations for change, and develop a family-focused understanding of its presenting problems. Techniques used during this stage include joining and reframing. Once family members are engaged and motivated, the *behavior change stage* begins. During this stage, immediate and long-term behavioral goals are identified and an individualized treatment plan for the family is implemented. Techniques used during this stage include training in parenting, communication, problem-solving, and coping skills. During the final *generalization stage*, the focus is on linking family members to community resources and helping them generalize their acquired skills to new problems and situations and identify ways to avoid relapse. 

9. **Multisystemic Therapy:** Multisystemic therapy (MST) is an evidence-based treatment that was originally developed for adolescent offenders at risk for out-of-home placement and their families, but it has subsequently been adapted for adolescents with other serious clinical problems including psychiatric disturbances, substance abuse, and childhood maltreatment. MST is based on Bronfenbrenner’s (2004) ecological model which views individuals as being embedded in and influenced directly and indirectly by multiple systems. Consequently, it focuses “on the specific individual, family, peer, school, and social network variables that contribute to a youth’s presenting problems, and on interactions between these factors linked with the presenting problems” (Schoenwald & Henggeler, 2005, p. 107). The MST model includes nine treatment principles that are applied using an analytic process (the “MST Do-Loop”) that structures the development, implementation, and evaluation of the treatment plan. The core principles are finding the fit between identified problems and their broader systemic context; focusing on positives and strengths; increasing responsibility; being present-focused, action-oriented, and well-defined; targeting behavior sequences; using developmentally appropriate interventions; encouraging continuous effort; stressing evaluation and accountability; and promoting generalization.  

MST is provided in the family’s home and community settings where problems occur, and it incorporates interventions derived from strategic and structural family therapy, behavior therapy, and cognitive-behavior therapy. It targets factors that are driving problem behaviors. For example, when an assessment indicates that the drivers of an adolescent’s daily marijuana use are low parental monitoring of the adolescent’s behavior and ineffective discipline, the adolescent’s poor social skills and friendships with peers who use drugs, and the availability of drugs in the adolescent’s neighborhood, these factors will be addressed in therapy. MST is delivered by a multidisciplinary team that is tailored to the adolescent’s and family’s target behaviors. For an adolescent with academic and conduct problems, frequent use of marijuana and cocaine, and a recent arrest for cocaine possession, the team will likely include a caseworker, family therapist, substance abuse counselor, and other individuals who will work with the adolescent in the adolescent’s school and neighborhood (Greene & Heilbrun, 2011). Research has confirmed that the effectiveness of MST is reduced when treatment fidelity is low (i.e., when MST is not implemented as intended). Consequently, a quality assurance system is used to promote treatment fidelity. System components include initial and booster training of therapists; ongoing supervision and consultation; measures that evaluate the adherence of the therapist, supervisor, and consultant to the MST model; and a program implementation review that is completed every 6 months by the supervisor and expert consultant (Henggeler, 2011).

**Group Therapy:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with the formative stages of group therapy and the therapeutic factors provided by group therapy. 

**1. Formative Phases of Group Therapy:** According to Yalom and Leszcz (2005), therapy groups usually experience three overlapping formative stages: During the *initial orientation, hesitant participation, search for meaning, and dependency stage*, group members are concerned with clarifying the nature and purpose of the group and depend on the leader for structure, acceptance, and answers to their questions. Interactions between members often focus on describing symptoms and previous treatments and involve giving and seeking advice. Next is the *conflict, dominance, and rebellion stage.* In this stage, members compete for power and control and attempt to establish a pecking order. Members tend to be critical of each other, and some may become hostile and resentful toward the therapist as they become aware that they’re not going to become the therapist’s “favorite child.” The final formative stage is the *development of cohesiveness stage.* In this stage, conflict between group members decreases, and cohesiveness increases as members begin to trust each other and the therapist. Members may reveal the real reason why they have come to therapy and show concern when a member is absent or drops out of therapy. The development of cohesiveness marks the beginning of a mature group that can deal effectively with the concerns and problems of group members.

**2. Therapeutic Factors:** Yalom and Leszcz (2005) describe 11 therapeutic factors that are responsible for the effects of group therapy: group cohesiveness, instillation of hope, universality, altruism, imparting information, development of socializing techniques, corrective recapitulation of the primary family group, interpersonal learning, imitative behavior, catharsis, and existential factors. Of these factors, group cohesiveness is considered to be the analogue of the therapeutic alliance in individual therapy, is viewed as a precondition for the other therapeutic factors, and has been most consistently found to be a strong predictor of positive group therapy outcomes.

