# Psychodynamic and Humanistic Therapies


**Psychodynamic Psychotherapies:** Included in this category are Freudian psychoanalysis and Jung’s analytical psychology.

1. **Freudian Psychoanalysis:** Freudian psychoanalysis reflects a deterministic and pessimistic view of human nature that views current psychological problems as being due to unconscious unresolved conflicts that arose during childhood. It also assumes that these conflicts cause anxiety and are the result of the divergent demands of the three aspects of personality – the id, ego, and superego: (a) The *id* is present at birth, and its life (sexual) and death (aggression) instincts are the primary source of psychic energy. It operates according to the pleasure principle and seeks immediate gratification of its instinctual needs using unconscious irrational means. (b) The *ego* develops at about six months of age and operates according to the reality principle. Although it also seeks to at least partially gratify the id’s instincts, it attempts to do so in realistic rational ways. (c) The *superego* is the last aspect of personality to develop. It represents the internalization of society’s values and standards and acts as the conscience. It attempts to permanently block (rather than gratify) the id’s instincts. 

Freud’s theory also proposes that, when the ego is unable to resolve a conflict between the id and superego using rational means, it resorts to one of its *defense mechanisms*. The defense mechanisms deny or distort reality and operate on an unconscious level, and they include repression, denial, reaction formation, projection, and sublimation: Repression is the basis of all other defense mechanisms, is involuntary, and involves keeping undesirable thoughts and urges out of conscious awareness. Denial is an immature defense mechanism that involves refusing to acknowledge distressing aspects of reality. Methods of denial include ignoring, distorting, and rejecting reality. Reaction formation involves defending against an unacceptable impulse by expressing its opposite, projection involves attributing an unacceptable impulse to another person, and sublimation involves channeling an unacceptable impulse into a socially desirable (and often admirable) endeavor. The occasional use of defense mechanisms is adaptive, but repeated reliance on them keeps a person from resolving the conflicts that are causing anxiety.

The main goals of Freudian psychoanalysis are “to make the unconscious conscious and to strengthen the ego so that behavior is based more on reality and less on instinctual cravings and irrational guilt” (Corey, 2016, p. 26). The primary technique of psychoanalysis is analysis of the client’s free associations, dreams, resistance, and transference, and the process of analysis consists of four steps (Greenson, 2016): (1) *Confrontatio*n involves helping clients recognize behaviors they’ve been unaware of and their possible cause. (2) *Clarification* brings the cause of behaviors into sharper focus by separating important details from extraneous material. (3) *Interpretation* involves explicitly linking conscious behaviors to unconscious processes. (4) Repeated interpretation leads to catharsis (the experience of repressed emotions) and insight into the connection between unconscious material and current behavior and then to *working through*, which is a gradual process during which the client accepts and integrates new insights into his/her life.

2. **Jung’s Analytical Psychology:** Jung accepted some aspects of Freudian theory but rejected others. For example, Jung believed that behavior is driven by both positive and negative forces, that personality continues to develop throughout the lifespan, and that behavior is affected by the past and the future. Jung also divided the unconscious aspect of the psyche into the personal and collective unconscious: The *personal unconscious* consists of a person’s own forgotten or repressed memories, while the *collective unconscious* consists of memories that are shared by all people and are passed down from one generation to the next. The collective unconscious contains archetypes, which are universal thoughts and images that predispose people to act in similar ways in certain circumstances. They’re expressed in myths, symbols, and dreams and include the persona, shadow, hero, and anima and animus.
The primary goal of analytical psychotherapy is to bring unconscious material into consciousness to facilitate the process of *individuation*, which occurs primarily during the second half of life and is “the process by which a person becomes a psychological ‘in-dividual,’ that is, a separate, indivisible unity or whole” (Jung, 1968, p. 275). Techniques used to achieve this goal include dream interpretation and the analysis of transference, which Jung viewed as being due to the projection of elements of the personal and collective unconscious.

**Humanistic, Existential, and Other Psychotherapies:** This category includes humanistic therapies (person-centered and Gestalt therapies), existential therapies, reality therapy, positive psychology, and personal construct therapy. 
The humanistic and existential therapies are sometimes categorized jointly as humanistic-existential therapies. However, while the two approaches share a number of similarities, they also differ in important ways (Jones-Smith, 2019; Winston, 2015): In terms of similarities, humanistic and existential therapies both focus on the here-and-now and adopt a phenomenological orientation, which means they prioritize a client’s subjective experience over objective reality. They also reject the medical model and use of clinical labels and, consequently, concentrate on a client’s internal qualities and perspective rather than the client’s symptoms. In terms of differences, humanistic therapies emphasize acceptance and growth and help clients become more fully-functioning and self-actualizing. In contrast, existential therapies emphasize freedom and responsibility and “help clients confront the anxieties that arise from the awareness of one’s existential condition … [and cultivate] authentic engagement with one’s world” (Winston, 2019, p. 45).

**1. Person-Centered Therapy**: Rogers's person-centered therapy is also known as client-centered therapy and is based on the assumption that all people have an innate drive toward *self-actualization*, which motivates them to achieve their full potential. According to Rogers, the drive toward self-actualization can be thwarted when a person experiences incongruence between his/her self-concept and experience. Conditions of worth are one source of incongruence and occur, for example, when parents provide a child with love and acceptance only when the child behaves in certain ways. According to Rogers, people often react to incongruence defensively by distorting or denying their experiences which, in turn, leads to psychological maladjustment.
The primary goal of person-centered therapy is to help the client become a “fully functioning person” who is not defensive, is open to new experiences, and is engaged in the process of self-actualization. To achieve this goal, person-centered therapists provide clients with three *facilitative (core) conditions*: empathy, unconditional positive regard, and congruence. Empathy involves understanding the client’s perspective and communicating that understanding to the client, unconditional positive regard involves valuing and accepting the client as a person, and congruence involves being genuine, authentic, and honest.

2. **Gestalt Therapy:** Gestalt therapy is based on the assumptions that (a) people are motivated to maintain a state of homeostasis, which is repeatedly disrupted by unfulfilled physical and psychological needs, and (b) people seek to obtain something from the environment to satisfy their unfulfilled needs in order to restore homeostasis. Neurosis (maladjustment) occurs when there’s a persistent disturbance in the boundary between the person and the environment that interferes with the person’s ability to fulfill needs. *Boundary disturbances* include the following: Introjection occurs when people adopt the beliefs, standards, and values of others without evaluation or awareness, while projection occurs when people attribute undesirable aspects of themselves to other people. Retroflection occurs when people do to themselves what they’d like to do to others; deflection occurs when people avoid contact with the environment; and confluence occurs when people blur the distinction between themselves and others.
Gestalt therapists consider gaining *awareness* of one’s current thoughts, feelings, and actions to be the curative factor in therapy. Strategies used to increase awareness include dream work and the empty chair technique. Dream work involves having the client role-play parts of his/her dream that represent disowned parts of the client’s personality. The empty-chair technique requires the client to interact with opposing aspects of his/her personality (e.g., top dog and underdog) or to resolve “unfinished business” with a significant person in the client’s past or present. In contrast to psychodynamic therapists, Gestalt therapists do not foster or interpret a client’s transference but, instead, help the client distinguish between his/her “transference fantasy” and reality.

3. **Existential Therapies:** Existential therapies were derived from existential philosophy and were developed by several psychiatrists and psychologists including Irvin Yalom, Rollo May, and Viktor Frankl. These therapies emphasize personal responsibility and choice and are based on the assumption that “each person must ultimately define his/her personal existence” (Nigesh & Saranya, 2017, p. 112). Existential therapists view psychological disturbances as the result of an inability to resolve conflicts that arise when facing four *ultimate concerns of existence*: death, freedom, isolation, and meaningless (Yalom, 1980). They also distinguish between two types of anxiety (May, 1950): *Normal (existential) anxiety* is in proportion to an objective threat, does not involve repression, and can be used constructively to identify and confront the conditions that elicited it and motivate positive change. In contrast, *neurotic anxiety* is disproportionate to an objective threat, involves repression, and keeps people from reaching their full potential. The primary goal of therapy is “to help clients lead more authentic lives … by assisting them in taking charge of their life, helping them choose for themselves the values and purposes that will define and guide their existence, and supporting them in actions that express these values and purposes” (Corey, 2004, p. 84). Existential therapists consider an authentic therapist-client relationship to be the most important therapeutic tool but may use other techniques such as questioning, interpretation, and reframing.

4. **Reality Therapy:** Glasser’s (1965) reality therapy is based on choice theory, which proposes that people have five basic innate needs (love and belonging, power, fun, freedom, and survival) and that the ways a person chooses to fulfill his or her needs determine whether he/she has a success or failure identity: When a person chooses to fulfill his/her needs responsibly (in positive, constructive ways that don’t infringe on the rights of others), the person has adopted a *success identity*. In contrast, when a person chooses to fulfill his/her needs irresponsibly (in negative, destructive ways that infringe on the rights of others and do not always help the person get what he/she wants), the person has adopted a *failure identity*.
The primary goal of reality therapy is to replace the client’s failure identity with a success identity by helping the client assume responsibility for his or her actions and adopt more appropriate ways to fulfill his or her needs. Strategies used by reality therapists are summarized by Wubbolding’s (1998) WDEP system: Therapists ask clients about their <u>w</u>ants and needs, determine what the client is currently <u>d</u>oing to foster awareness of his/her behaviors, encourage the client <u>e</u>valuate his/her own behaviors, and help the client create a <u>p</u>lan of action.

5. **Positive Psychology:** As described by Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi (2000), positive psychology “is about valued subjective experiences: well-being, contentment, and satisfaction (in the past); hope and optimism (for the future); and flow and happiness (in the present)” (p. 5). Flow is an important concept in positive psychology and refers to “a state in which people are so involved in an activity that nothing else seems to matter; the experience is so enjoyable that people will continue to do it even at great cost, for the sheer sake of doing it” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, p.4). People are most likely to experience flow when there is a challenge-skill balance, which occurs when people believe that they have the skills needed to meet an activity’s challenge and the challenge and skill level are both relatively high. A distinctive characteristic of positive psychology is its emphasis on using the scientific method to evaluate its theories, concepts, and interventions. For example, empirical research has linked positive emotions and optimism to increased longevity and positive psychology interventions to improved physical health (Park et al., 2016).

6. **Personal Construct Therapy:** Kelly’s (1963) personal construct therapy focuses on how people construe (perceive, interpret, and anticipate) events. It proposes that there are alternative ways of doing so and that people can change the way they construe events to alleviate undesirable behaviors and outcomes. According to Kelly, construing involves the use of *personal constructs*, which are bipolar dimensions of meaning (e.g., fair/unfair, friend/enemy, relevant/irrelevant) that arise from a person’s experiences and may operate on an unconscious or conscious level.
Practitioners of personal construct therapy consider the therapist and client to be partners who work together to help the client identify and replace maladaptive personal constructs. For example, Kelly developed fixed-role therapy to help clients try out alternative personal constructs.  It involves having the client role-play a fictional character that is described by the therapist and construes events in alternative ways.

