# Classical Conditioning


Classical conditioning helps explain involuntary, automatic responses to stimuli.

**Classical Conditioning Procedure:** Classical conditioning was initially described by Ivan Pavlov, and his most famous studies involved training dogs to respond to a ringing bell with salivation. In these studies, meat powder was an unconditioned stimulus (US) because it automatically elicited the unconditioned response (UR) of salivation from the dogs. The ringing bell began as a neutral stimulus because it did not automatically elicit salivation; however, after being repeatedly presented with meat powder, the ringing bell became a conditioned stimulus (CS) that elicited a conditioned response (CR) of salivation when presented alone.

The magnitude of a CR is always less than the magnitude of the UR. It’s affected, however, by the number of times the CS and US are paired during conditioning trials, with the magnitude increasing (up to a point) as the number of pairings increases. In addition, the strength and speed of acquisition of a CR depend on the procedure that’s used: (a) When using *delay conditioning*, presentation of the CS precedes and overlaps presentation of the US. Of the conditioning procedures, delay conditioning is most effective, and a delay of about one-half second between presentation of the CS and US is optimal. (b) When using *trace conditioning*, the CS is presented and terminated just before the US is presented. (c) When using *simultaneous conditioning*, the CS and US are presented and terminated at about the same time. (d) When using *backward conditioning*, the US is presented before the CS. Backward conditioning is usually ineffective, which suggests that it’s the contingency of stimuli (i.e., that the occurrence of the US depends on the occurrence of the CS) that accounts for classical conditioning.

**Other Classical Conditioning Terms and Procedures:** For the exam, you want to be familiar with several other terms and procedures associated with classical conditioning:

1. **Classical Extinction:** Classical extinction occurs when, after the CS is repeatedly presented without the US, the CS no longer produces a CR.

2. **Spontaneous Recovery:** After a CR has apparently been extinguished by repeatedly presenting the CS without the US, the CR returns in a reduced or less intense form when, after a period of time, the CS is again presented alone. Pavlov referred to this return of the CR as spontaneous recovery. He concluded that spontaneous recovery provides evidence that the apparent extinction of a CR is due to a physiological process that suppresses (rather than eliminates) the association between the CS and CR, and he referred to this physiological process as internal inhibition.

3. **Stimulus Generalization:**  Stimulus generalization occurs when stimuli similar to the original CS elicit the CR without ever being paired with the US. The establishment of a startle response in Little Albert, a nine-month-old infant, illustrates how phobias can be acquired with classical conditioning and provides an example of stimulus generalization. John Watson established a startle response to a white rat in Little Albert by pairing presentation of a white rat (which Albert was initially not afraid of) with presentation of an unexpected loud noise that naturally elicited a startle response from Albert. In this situation, the white rat was the CS and the unexpected loud noise was the US. After several pairings of the CS and US, Albert began to respond to the white rat with a startle reaction (the CR) when it was presented alone. Albert also exhibited a great deal of stimulus generalization and responded to a white rabbit and other white furry objects with a startle reaction. 

4. **Stimulus Discrimination:** Stimulus discrimination is the opposite of stimulus generalization and is the ability to discriminate between the CS and similar stimuli. Pavlov found that, when dogs were exhibiting stimulus generalization, they could be taught to discriminate between similar stimuli. For example, if a dog was conditioned to salivate in response to a 2000-Hz tone and subsequently also salivated in response to a 2100-Hz tone, discrimination training would involve repeatedly presenting the 2000-Hz tone with meat powder and the 2100-Hz tone without meat powder. As the result of this discrimination training, the dog would be able to discriminate between the two stimuli and salivate only in response to the 2000-Hz tone.

While conducting studies on stimulus discrimination, Pavlov found that requiring dogs to make difficult discriminations had unexpected consequences. For example, in one study, Pavlov attempted to train dogs to salivate in response to a circle but not to ellipses. When discrimination became very difficult (when an ellipse was very similar to a circle), the dogs became extremely agitated and uncharacteristically aggressive. Pavlov referred to these unusual behaviors as *experimental neurosis* and concluded that they were caused by a conflict between excitatory and inhibitory processes in the central nervous system.   
5. **Conditioned Inhibition:** Conditioned inhibition is a method for reducing or eliminating a conditioned response and involves inhibiting a previously established conditioned response (CR) to a conditioned stimulus (CS). For example, in Pavlov’s studies, a ringing bell was repeatedly paired with meat powder (US) until the ringing bell became a conditioned stimulus (CS) and produced a CR of salivation when presented alone. The process of conditioned inhibition involves repeatedly pairing presentation of the conditioned stimulus (now referred to as CS+) and a new neutral stimulus (referred to as CS-) <u>without</u> presenting the US. With regard to Pavlov’s research, the ringing bell (CS+) could be repeatedly presented together with a blinking light (CS-) without presenting the meat powder (US). As a result, the blinking light (CS-) becomes a *conditioned inhibitor* and signals that the US will not be presented. As a result, presentation of the CS+ (ringing bell) alone will continue to produce a CR of salivation, but presentation of the CS+ and CS- (ringing bell and blinking light) together or the CS- (blinking light) alone will not produce the CR of salivation.

6. **Higher-Order Conditioning:** Higher-order conditioning involves treating a CS (e.g., a ringing bell) as an unconditioned stimulus and pairing it with a neutral stimulus (e.g., a blinking light) so that the neutral stimulus also becomes a CS and elicits the CR (e.g., salivation) when presented alone. Note that, when higher-order conditioning involves a second CS, it’s also referred to as second-order conditioning; when it involves a third CS, it’s also referred to as third-order conditioning; etc. 

7. **Compound Conditioning:** Compound conditioning occurs when two or more stimuli are presented together and includes blocking and overshadowing. *Blocking* occurs when conditioning trials are first used to establish an association between one neutral stimulus (e.g., a ringing bell) and a US (e.g., meat powder) by repeatedly pairing presentation of the neutral stimulus with the US. Then, when the neutral stimulus becomes a CS and elicits a CR when presented alone, it’s repeatedly presented simultaneously with a second neutral stimulus (e.g., a flashing light) just before presenting the US. In this situation, classical conditioning of the first neutral stimulus blocks classical conditioning of the second neutral stimulus, and the second neutral stimulus never becomes a CS. Blocking occurs apparently because the second neutral stimulus does not provide any new information about the occurrence of the US (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). 

*Overshadowing* occurs when two neutral stimuli are, from the start, repeatedly presented together before the US. In this situation, the two stimuli will elicit a CR when presented together; however, when each stimulus is presented alone, the more salient (stronger) stimulus produces a CR, but the less salient (weaker) stimulus does not. The research has found that this occurs even when the less salient stimulus can become a CS when it’s paired by itself with the US. In other words, the failure of the less salient stimulus to become a CS is not due to its low salience but to being overshadowed by the more salient stimulus when the two stimuli are presented together during conditioning trials.