# Emotions and Stress

Theories of Emotion: The major theories of emotion include the following:

**1. James-Lange Theory:** This theory proposes that exposure to an emotionally salient stimulus causes a physiological reaction which, in turn, is perceived as an emotion – e.g., when a person is faced with a growling bear while hiking in the woods, her heart begins to beat faster and she starts breathing more deeply, and she then feels afraid. In other words, the experience of an emotion follows (rather than precedes) physiological arousal. A related and more recent explanation for emotion is provided by the *facial feedback hypothesis*, which predicts that facial expressions associated with specific emotions initiate physiological changes that are consistent with those emotions. Research supporting the facial feedback hypothesis has found that mimicking a facial expression that’s associated with a specific emotion causes us to experience that emotion – e.g., smiling makes us feel happy.

**2. Cannon-Bard Theory:** Cannon-Bard theory proposes that the experience of an emotion and physiological arousal occur together when an environmental stimulus causes the thalamus (which receives input from the senses) to simultaneously send signals to the cerebral cortex and the sympathetic nervous system. Unlike James-Lange theory, this theory views all emotions as involving similar physiological arousal and contends that, for this reason, differences in emotional reactions cannot be attributed to differences in the nature of physiological arousal.

**3. Schachter and Singer’s Two-Factor Theory:** This theory is also known as cognitive arousal theory and describes the experience of emotion as the result of physiological arousal followed by an attribution (“cognitive label”) for that arousal. Like Cannon-Bard theory, it assumes that physiological arousal is similar for all emotions but also proposes that differences in the experience of emotion are due to differences in the attributions for the arousal, which depend on external cues. Evidence for this theory was provided by Schachter and Singer’s (1962) “epinephrine studies” in which subjects experiencing unexplained arousal looked to the environment (the behavior of a confederate) to determine what emotions they were experiencing. Schachter and Singer’s studies generated a great deal of research on the *misattribution of arousal*, which is the tendency to mislabel arousal when its cause is unknown or ambiguous. 

Studies on two-factor theory also led to Zillman’s (1971) *excitation transfer theory*, which is often erroneously described as being synonymous with misattribution of arousal. Although excitation transfer theory incorporates the concept of misattribution of arousal, Zillman described it as an explanation of how physical arousal elicited by one event can be transferred to and intensify arousal elicited by a later unrelated event. It’s based on three assumptions: (a) Physical arousal associated with emotions (e.g., elevated heart rate and blood pressure) decays slowly and can continue for some time following the event that elicited the arousal. (b) Residual arousal caused by one event can intensify arousal caused by a subsequent unrelated event. (c) People often have limited insight into the causes of their physical arousal and, consequently, can misattribute their intense arousal solely to the subsequent unrelated event. For example, the arousal induced by watching a violent film can linger and make people who are subsequently provoked by a confederate respond with greater anger toward the confederate than do people who watched a nonviolent film (Cantor, 2003). The research has found that excitation transfer applies to a variety of emotional reactions. For instance, residual arousal from sexual excitation has been found to intensify subsequent anger, sadness, and altruism, and residual excitation from fear has been found to intensify subsequent sexual attraction and joy. 

**4. Lazarus’s Cognitive Appraisal Theory:** Lazarus’s (1991) cognitive appraisal theory proposes that differences in emotional reactions to events are due to different appraisals of those events. In other words, two people can experience the same event but respond with different emotions because they appraise the situation differently. It also assumes, in contrast to other theories, that physiological arousal <u>follows</u> cognitive appraisal.

Cognitive appraisal theory distinguishes between three types of appraisal:  (a) *Primary appraisal* involves evaluating the event to determine if it’s irrelevant, benign-positive, or stressful. When a person decides the event is stressful, the person then determines if it involves a threat, a challenge, or harm/loss. According to Lazarus, primary appraisal is affected by several factors including the person’s beliefs, values, motivation, and expectations. (b) *Secondary appraisal* occurs when the person determines that the event is stressful and involves identifying his/her coping options and the likelihood that the options will adequately deal with the event. (c) *Reappraisal* occurs when the person monitors the situation and, as appropriate, changes his/her primary and/or secondary appraisal.

5. **LeDoux’s Two-System Theory:** LeDoux’s two-system theory focuses on fear but may also be useful for understanding other emotions (LeDoux & Brown, 2017). In contrast to theories that view the physiological, behavioral, and feeling aspects of fear as being driven by an innate “fear system” that is mediated primarily by subcortical regions of the brain, the two-system theory proposes that fear consists of two separate but interacting systems that both respond to threatening stimuli: (a) The *subcortical system* is also referred to as the survival system. It reacts quickly and automatically to sensory information about a threatening stimulus with physiological and defensive behavioral responses. The amygdala is the major component of the subcortical system. (b) The *cortical system* is also referred to as the conscious emotional system. It processes information from the senses, subcortical system, and episodic and semantic memory using relevant cognitive processes (e.g., attention, working memory, and decision-making) and generates the conscious feeling of fear when it determines that the stimulus is actually threatening and warrants a fear response. The cortical system includes areas of the cortex that process sensory information (e.g., the visual cortex) and areas that are also involved in non-emotional conscious experiences (e.g., the prefrontal cortex and parietal cortex). Note that, in earlier research, LeDoux (1996) referred to the subcortical and cortical systems as the low road and high road, respectively.
**Brain Mechanisms:** Papez (1937) was among the first to link emotions to specific areas of the brain. His “Papez circuit” consists of several interconnected structures including the hippocampus, mammillary bodies, thalamus, and cingulate gyrus. Subsequent research on the brain mechanisms that mediate emotion found that the Papez circuit is involved more with memory than emotion and clarified the role of several areas of the brain in the experience and expression of emotion.

**1. Cerebral Cortex:** The two hemispheres of the cerebral cortex play different roles in the mediation of emotion. Areas in the left (dominant) hemisphere mediate happiness and other positive emotions, and damage to these areas produces a “catastrophic reaction” that involves depression, anxiety, fear, and paranoia. In contrast, areas in the right (nondominant) hemisphere mediate sadness and other negative emotions, and damage to these areas produces an “indifference reaction” that involves inappropriate indifference and/or euphoria. 

**2. Amygdala:** The amygdala is part of the limbic system and is involved in several aspects of emotion: It’s responsible for recognizing fear in facial expressions, attaching emotions to memories, and evaluating incoming information to determine its emotional significance and then mediating the emotional reaction to it. Electrical stimulation of the amygdala can produce a fear or rage response, and bilateral lesions can cause a loss of the fear response without a loss of other emotional responses.

**3. Hypothalamus:** The hypothalamus regulates the physical signs of emotion through its communication with the autonomic nervous system and pituitary gland. The role of the hypothalamus in emotion has been confirmed by studies finding that bilateral lesions in certain areas can produce rage and that electrical stimulation of certain areas can cause other emotions such as pleasure or fear.

**Stress:**  An influential model of the body’s reaction to stress is provided by Selye’s (1976) *general adaptation syndrome*, which proposes that the body’s response to all types of stress is the same and involves three stages: During the initial *alarm reaction stage*, increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system provides the body with the energy it needs to respond to the stressor with a fight-or-flight reaction. If the stressor persists, the *resistance stage* begins. During this stage, some physiological functions return to normal while cortisol (a stress hormone) continues to circulate at an elevated level to help the body maintain a high energy level and cope with the stressor. Then, if the stress or its effects are not resolved, the *exhaustion stage* begins. In this stage, physiological processes begin to break down. (Additional information on Selye’s general adaptation syndrome is provided in the organizational psychology content summary covering satisfaction, commitment, and stress.)

Selye’s model has been challenged by research finding that physiological, psychological, and behavioral responses to stress are not always the same but, instead, are affected by the type of stress and a person’s genetic make-up and previous experiences. One reconceptualization of the stress response is provided by McEwen’s *allostatic load model*, which is based on the assumption that “the brain is the key organ of stress … because it determines what is threatening and therefore stressful, and also determines the physiological and behavioral responses [to stress]” (2006, p. 367). McEwen identifies the amygdala, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex as the primary mediators of these functions. He also uses the following terms to describe the body’s response to stress: *Allostasis* refers to processes that allow the body to achieve stability by adapting to change. For example, elevated blood pressure and cortisol level may be necessary to adapt to a stressful event. These processes result in an *allostatic state* that can be maintained for a limited period of time without having adverse consequences. However, an extended allostatic state due to chronic stress or repeated episodes of acute stress can produce wear-and-tear on the body and brain, which is referred to as an *allostatic load*. Then, if the allostatic load continues for days, weeks, or longer, it can become an *allostatic overload*, which has adverse effects on the person’s physical and psychological health. For example, it can cause dysregulation of the immune system, which increases a person’s vulnerability to disease, and/or can result in PTSD, major depressive disorder, a substance use disorder, or other stress-related psychiatric disorder. According to McEwen, the nature of allostasis and consequences of allostatic load vary from person to person due to several factors, including differences in genetic makeup, resilience, and perceptions about the controllability of the stressor.