# Interventions Based on Operant Conditioning


Interventions based on operant conditioning make use of positive reinforcement, punishment, and/or extinction. The identification of appropriate interventions is often based on the results of a *functional behavioral assessment (FBA)*, which consists of the following steps (Mascolo, Alfonso, & Flanagan, 2014): (1) Collect information about the target behavior using direct methods (e.g., observation of the individual) and indirect methods (e.g., family member reports). (2) Collect information about the antecedents and consequences that are maintaining the behavior and use this information to develop hypotheses about the function of the behavior. (3) Test the hypotheses by systematically altering the antecedents and consequences to determine the effects of doing so on the behavior. If the behavior changes, proceed to step 4; if not, repeat steps 2 and 3. (4) Identify and implement function-based interventions that target antecedents and consequences that are maintaining the undesirable behavior or that promote appropriate behavior. (5) Evaluate the effectiveness of the interventions and make any necessary modifications.

**Positive Reinforcement:** Interventions that make use of positive reinforcement include shaping, chaining, and the Premack principle.  
1. **Shaping:** Shaping involves reinforcing successive approximations to the desired behavior. As an example, Lovaas and his colleagues (e.g., Lovaas, Berberich, Perloff, & Schaeffer, 1966) used shaping to teach imitative speech to children with schizophrenia or autism. This involved first reinforcing a child with food and praise for making any vocalization, then reinforcing the child only for making any vocalization after the teacher said a word, then only for making sounds that were similar to the teacher’s word, and then only for imitating the teacher’s word. Once the child was able to imitate the initial word, the teacher modeled other words and then phrases and sentences for the child to imitate.

2. **Chaining:** Chaining is used to establish a complex behavior that consists of separate responses (links in the behavior chain). Chaining begins with a task analysis to identify the individual responses that make up the behavior chain and can be forward or backward. *Forward chaining* involves teaching each response separately, beginning with the first response in the behavior chain and, once that response is mastered, teaching the next response. This process continues until the individual is performing the desired behavior. *Backward chaining* involves beginning with the last response in the chain and then teaching the second to last response, etc. For both types of chaining, the individual is reinforced after he/she masters each new response and after he/she performs the new response with all of the previously learned responses in the correct sequence. As an example of forward chaining, teaching a child to brush her teeth would involve teaching her to pick up the toothpaste with her left hand and open it with her right hand, picking up the toothbrush with her right hand, squeezing toothpaste on the toothbrush and putting down the toothpaste, using the toothbrush to brush her teeth, etc.
Note that the difference between shaping and chaining is that, with shaping, only the final target behavior is important and the other behaviors that were reinforced during training are no longer important or evident once the individual can perform the final behavior. In contrast, with chaining, each response in the behavior chain is important and evident when the individual performs the target behavior. 

3. **Premack Principle:** When using the Premack principle (Premack, 1965), a high frequency or preferred behavior is used as reinforcement for a low frequency or less preferred behavior to increase the low frequency behavior. A parent is using the Premack principle when her child loves to play video games but hates doing homework and she tells the child he can play video games only after he’s finished his homework.
**Punishment:** Interventions that rely on positive or negative punishment are used to decrease or eliminate an undesirable behavior.

1. **Overcorrection:** Overcorrection is classified as a type of positive punishment because it involves applying a penalty following an undesirable behavior in order to reduce or eliminate that behavior. It consists of two procedures that can be used alone or together:  *Restitution* involves having the individual correct the consequences of his/her behavior and restore the environment to a better state. For example, if a child becomes angry and knocks over several chairs in the classroom, he would be required to pick up the chairs and appropriately position those chairs and all of the other chairs in the room. *Positive practice* involves practicing alternative appropriate behaviors that are similar to the desirable behavior. The child who knocked over chairs might be required to straighten up the entire classroom. Both procedures may include providing verbal instructions and/or physical (manual) guidance.

2. **Response Cost:** Response cost is a type of negative punishment that involves removing a specific reinforcer temporarily or permanently after a behavior occurs to decrease or eliminate that behavior. A parent is using response cost when her child loses 15 minutes of video game time whenever he acts aggressively toward his younger sister.

3. **Time Out:** Time out is also known as time out from positive reinforcement and time out from generalized reinforcement and involves removing all sources of reinforcement following an undesirable behavior for a brief period of time. Having a preschool child sit in the corner of the classroom facing the wall after she engages in an undesirable behavior is an example of time out. Several factors impact the effectiveness of time out (Zastrow & Kirst-Ashman, 2007): The individual should be informed about what behaviors will result in a time out and how long the time out will last. The time out should be applied immediately after the behavior occurs and should be applied consistently to that behavior. The length of the time out should be brief (one to 10 minutes), but it should not end until the individual is no longer engaging in the behavior. Time out should be combined with positive reinforcement for appropriate behaviors.
**Extinction:** Operant extinction involves withholding reinforcement from a behavior that has been being reinforced. A parent would be using extinction if, in the past, she usually paid attention to her young child whenever he whines but decides to stop paying attention to him after realizing that doing so increases his whining. For extinction to be effective, the removal of reinforcement must be consistent and should be combined with reinforcement for appropriate behaviors.

Differential reinforcement combines extinction and positive reinforcement and is used to eliminate or weaken a target (undesirable) behavior and increase an alternative (desirable) behavior or an alternative form of the target behavior. There are several types of differential reinforcement: (a) *Differential reinforcement of incompatible behavior* (DRI) involves reinforcing an individual when he/she engages in a specified desirable behavior that’s incompatible with the undesirable behavior. A teacher is using DRI when a child who frequently gets out of his seat during class is reinforced for each 30-minute interval that he stays in his seat. (b) *Differential reinforcement of alternative behavior* (DRA) involves reinforcing the individual when he/she engages in one or more specified alternative (but not necessarily incompatible) behaviors rather than the undesirable behavior. A teacher is using DRA to reduce a student’s shouting out in class by reinforcing the student for raising her hand instead of shouting whenever she wants to say something in class. (c) *Differential reinforcement of other behavior* (DRO) involves reinforcing the individual for engaging in any behaviors other than the undesirable behavior. A parent is using DRO to reduce the hand-flapping of a child with autism spectrum disorder when she ignores the child’s hand-flapping and reinforces the child for engaging in any appropriate activities during 30-minute intervals. (d) Unlike DRI, DRA, and DRO, *differential reinforcement of low rates of behavior* (DRL) doesn’t involve reinforcing a desirable behavior but, instead, reinforcing the individual when he/she engages in the target behavior at or less than a specified low rate. An elementary school teacher is using DRL to reduce the number of times a child interrupts the class by asking questions when she reinforces the child for every 60-minute interval that the child asks three or fewer questions.