# Anxiety Disorders and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

**Anxiety Disorders and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Anxiety Disorders**: As described in DSM-5-TR, the disorders included in this category “share features of excessive fear and anxiety and related behavioral disturbances” (p. 215). Data collected by the Global Burden of Disease Study indicate that the anxiety disorders are the most prevalent mental disorders worldwide (Dattani et al., 2021). Risk factors for developing an anxiety disorder include exposure to stressful life events, the trait of behavioral inhibition, and having a parent with an anxiety disorder. With regard to the latter, there is evidence that children with anxious parents are nearly twice as likely to have anxiety problems than are children without anxious parents (Lawrence et al., 2019). A genetic contribution to these disorders is supported by family and twin studies reporting heritability estimates ranging from about 30% to 50% and concordance rates ranging from 12% to 26% for monozygotic twins and 4% to 15% for dizygotic twins (Church et al., 2012; Shimada-Sugimoto et al., 2015).

1. **Separation Anxiety Disorder:** This disorder involves developmentally inappropriate and excessive fear or anxiety about being separated from attachment figures as indicated by at least three of eight symptoms – e.g., excessive distress when anticipating or experiencing separation from attachment figures; persistent reluctance to go to school, work, or other place away from home because of fear of separation from attachment figures; repeated complaints of physical symptoms when separation from a major attachment figure occurs or is anticipated. For the diagnosis, symptoms must last for at least four weeks in children and adolescents or six months in adults and cause significant distress or impaired functioning. Separation anxiety disorder often develops after exposure to a stressful event, such as parental divorce or the death of a relative or a pet. 

School refusal is often a manifestation of separation anxiety disorder but, alternatively, may be due to social anxiety disorder or other disorder. Children with school refusal want to stay with their parents or other caregivers rather than go to school, and they complain of physical symptoms (e.g., headache, stomachache, nausea) and cry, plead, bargain, or exhibit panic symptoms when the time to go to school approaches (James, Nelson, & Ashwill, 2013).
The preferred treatment for separation anxiety disorder is ordinarily cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) that includes psychoeducation, exposure, relaxation techniques, and cognitive restructuring, and there’s evidence that the effectiveness of CBT for children is increased when it’s combined with parent training (Eisen, Raleigh, & Neuhoff, 2008). When the disorder involves school refusal, getting the child back to school is an initial treatment goal in order to reduce the risk for social isolation, academic failure, and other secondary impairments (First & Tasman, 2010).

2. **Specific Phobia:** Specific phobia involves intense fear of or anxiety about a specific object or situation accompanied by avoiding the object or situation or enduring it with intense distress. For the diagnosis, fear or anxiety must be out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the object or situation, must be persistent (ordinarily lasting for at least six months), and must cause significant distress or impaired functioning. A specifier is used to indicate the type of phobia:  animal (e.g., snakes, spiders); natural environment (e.g., lightening, heights); blood-injection-injury (e.g., seeing blood, having an invasive medical procedure); situational (e.g., elevators, bridges); other (e.g., situations that may cause vomiting, choking, or catching an illness). Specific phobia is about twice as common in girls than boys, although the rates differ somewhat for different phobic stimuli. Its onset is usually in childhood, with the mean age of onset being about 10 years of age.

Specific phobia has been linked to a number of factors including heredity, altered brain activity, and learning experiences. With regard to genetics, twin studies have produced moderate heritability estimates that vary somewhat for the different types of specific phobia but range from about 30% to 50% (Phan, 2015). Functional neuroimaging techniques have linked phobic responses to increased activity in the amygdala, insula, thalamus, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), which are responsible for emotion generation, and to reduced activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vPFC) and ventral anterior cingulate cortex (vACC), which are involved in emotion and fear regulation (Goodkind & Etkin, 2018; Penate et al., 2017). Learning experiences are addressed by Mowrer’s (1947) two-factor theory, which attributes phobic reactions to a combination of classical and operant conditioning: Classical conditioning occurs when a previously neutral (non-anxiety arousing) object or event becomes a conditioned stimulus that elicits a conditioned response of anxiety after it has been paired with an unconditioned stimulus that naturally elicits anxiety. Operant conditioning then occurs when individuals learn that avoiding the conditioned stimulus allows them to avoid experiencing anxiety. In other words, their avoidance behaviors are negatively reinforced. As a result, the conditioned response of anxiety is not extinguished because individuals never have opportunities to experience the conditioned stimulus without the unconditioned stimulus. 

The first-line treatment for specific phobia is exposure and response prevention (ERP) either alone or as a component of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT with ERP). The goal of ERP is to extinguish the conditioned anxiety response by exposing patients to feared objects or situations while preventing them from making their usual avoidance responses. There are two types of ERP, and both can be conducted in vivo or in imagination: *Flooding* involves immediately exposing a patient to the most feared object or situation until the patient’s anxiety subsides (i.e., is extinguished), while *graded (graduated) exposure* involves gradually exposing the patient to feared objects or situations, beginning with those that elicit less intense anxiety and progressing to those that elicit increasingly more intense anxiety. Research on ERP has found that in vivo exposure is more effective than exposure in imagination, that therapist-led exposure is more effective than self-directed exposure, and that virtual reality exposure may be as effective as in vivo exposure for some types of specific phobia including fear of heights (acrophobia), fear of flying, and fear of small animals (Barlow et al., 2015; Krijn et al., 2004; Suso-Ribera et al., 2019). For some phobias, the effectiveness of ERP increases when it is combined with another intervention. For example, people with the blood-injection-injury subtype typically react to feared stimuli with a brief initial increase in heart rate and blood pressure that is followed by a decrease in heart rate and blood pressure, which causes them to faint. Therefore, exposure for this type of phobia is most effective when it’s combined with applied tension, which involves repeatedly tensing and relaxing the body’s large muscle groups to increase blood pressure and prevent fainting.

**3. Social Anxiety Disorder (Social Phobia):** Social anxiety disorder is characterized by a fear or anxiety reaction to at least one social situation in which the person may be exposed to scrutiny by others. For the diagnosis, the person must fear that exhibiting symptoms in the situation will be negatively evaluated and, as a result, either avoids the situation or endures it with intense fear or anxiety. In addition, fear or anxiety must be excessive for the actual threat posed by the situation, and fear, anxiety, and/or avoidance must be persistent (last for at least six months) and cause significant distress or impaired functioning. Cognitive behavior therapy and antidepressant medications (SSRIs and SNRIs) are first-line treatments for this disorder. Cognitive behavior therapy is an empirically supported treatment for children, adolescents, and adults and incorporates a number of techniques including cognitive restructuring and exposure. There is evidence that, for adults, guided internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy is equivalent to face-to-face cognitive behavior therapy in terms of symptom reduction for this disorder and other anxiety disorders (e.g., Andersson et al., 2014; Esfandiari et al., 2021). The research has also found that school-based cognitive behavior therapy has beneficial effects for children and adolescents (Tse et al., 2023).

4. **Panic Disorder:** This disorder involves recurrent unexpected panic attacks with at least one attack being followed by one month or more of persistent concern about additional attacks or their consequences and/or a significant maladaptive change in behavior related to the attack. The DSM-5-TR defines a panic attack as “an abrupt surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes” (p. 235) and that involves at least four of 13 symptoms: e.g., heart palpitations, sweating, nausea or abdominal distress, dizziness, fear of losing control or “going crazy,” fear of dying, paresthesia, derealization or depersonalization. Because symptoms of a panic attack are similar to those associated with hyperthyroidism, cardiac arrhythmia, and several other medical conditions, those conditions must be ruled out before this diagnosis is assigned.

The treatment of panic disorder often involves a comprehensive cognitive-behavioral intervention. An example is panic control treatment (Barlow et al., 1989), which combines interoceptive exposure with relaxation and other techniques for controlling symptoms. (Interoceptive exposure involves deliberately exposing the person to the physical symptoms associated with panic attacks by, for example, having the person run in place, spin in a circle, or breathe through a straw.) Some antidepressants (e.g., imipramine) and benzodiazepines have been found useful for alleviating panic attacks, but they’re associated with a high relapse rate when used alone.

5. **Agoraphobia:** Agoraphobia involves marked fear or anxiety that occurs in at least two of five situations: using public transportation, being in open spaces, being in enclosed spaces, standing in line or being in a crowd, and being outside the home alone. For the diagnosis, the person must fear or avoid the situations due to concern that escape will be difficult or that help will be unavailable if he/she develops panic symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms. In addition, the person’s fear or anxiety must be excessive for the actual threat posed by the situations; the situations must almost always elicit fear or anxiety and be actively avoided, require the presence of a companion, or be endured with intense fear or anxiety; and the fear, anxiety, or avoidance must be persistent (typically lasting for at least six months) and cause significant distress or impaired functioning.
The first-line treatment for agoraphobia is in vivo exposure and response prevention. Graded exposure is most commonly used, but there’s evidence that intense (non-graded) exposure is also effective and may have better long-term effects (e.g., Feigenbaum, 1988). There’s also evidence that combining in vivo exposure with applied relaxation, breathing retraining, or cognitive techniques does <u>not</u> significantly improve outcomes and that the key contributor to the effectiveness of exposure is learning to tolerate high levels of fear and anxiety (Barlow, Conklin, & Bentley, 2015).

6. **Generalized Anxiety Disorder:** Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) involves excessive anxiety and worry about multiple events or activities that occur on most days for at least six months. For the diagnosis, the person must find anxiety and worrying difficult to control, and symptoms must cause significant distress or impaired functioning and include at least three of the following (or at least one for children): restlessness, being easily fatigued, difficulty concentrating, irritability, muscle tension, sleep disturbance. Associated symptoms include sweating, nausea, headaches, dizziness, breathlessness, and visual disturbances (e.g., eye strain, blurry vision, tunnel vision, light sensitivity). In contrast to people with nonpathological anxiety, those with GAD feel unable to control their worrying, worry about a larger number of events, and are more likely to have associated somatic symptoms. The DSM-5-TR notes that the content of worries is age-related, with children and adolescents worrying most about catastrophic events and their competence in sports and school and older adults worrying most about their health and safety. Finally, in terms of lifetime prevalence, the most common comorbid disorder for GAD is major depressive disorder (Ruscio et al., 2017).

Worry is a central feature of GAD, and several explanations have been proposed to account for its function. According to *cognitive avoidance theory* (Borkovec et al., 2004), worry is a verbal-linguistic activity that elicits low levels of mental imagery and helps individuals with GAD avoid unpleasant imagery and the negative emotions and somatic arousal associated with that imagery. Support for this theory is provided by studies finding that individuals with GAD often claim that worry keeps them from engaging in more disturbing thoughts about feared events. The *contrast avoidance model* (Newman & Llera, 2011) proposes that people with GAD engage in chronic worry to maintain a sustained state of negative emotions that allows them to avoid sudden shifts from a neutral or positive emotional state to a negative emotional state when faced with feared stimuli. Support for this model is provided by research showing that people with GAD are more disturbed than people without GAD when they experience emotional contrasts (i.e., rapid shifts from a neutral or positive mood to a negative mood). Finally, the *intolerance of uncertainty model* (Dugas et al., 2005) describes worry associated with GAD as being characterized by four factors: (a) Intolerance of uncertainty is a low tolerance for and strong reaction to ambiguity. (b) Negative problem orientation consists of poor problem-solving confidence and ability, especially in uncertain situations. (c) Positive beliefs about worry refers to the tendency to overestimate the advantages of worrying (e.g., to believe that worrying helps prevent bad things from happening and provides distraction from other disturbing thoughts). (d) Cognitive avoidance of mental images is based on Borkovec’s cognitive avoidance theory and refers to the use of coping strategies that facilitate the avoidance of threatening images. This model is supported by research confirming that the four factors distinguish people with GAD from those with other anxiety disorders.  

Risk factors for GAD include a family history of an anxiety disorder; exposure to childhood trauma or chronic stress; and the temperament/personality traits of behavioral inhibition, harm avoidance, and neuroticism, which is also known as negative affectivity and is a risk factor for other anxiety disorders (APA, 2022; Patriquin & Mathew, 2017). In addition, neuroimaging studies have found that GAD is associated with abnormalities in the ventrolateral and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, posterior parietal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus (Kolesar et al., 2019; Madonna et al., 2019). For example, there’s evidence that GAD is associated with reduced connectivity between regions of the prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex and the amygdala, which suggests there is weak top-down control of amygdala reactivity (Tromp et al., 2012).
The treatment of GAD ordinarily involves cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) and/or pharmacotherapy, with some studies finding that CBT alone and CBT combined with pharmacotherapy are more effective than pharmacotherapy alone (Bandelow et al., 2007). In addition, studies investigating the effects of combining motivational interviewing as a pretreatment to CBT have generally found that the combination of interventions is more effective than CBT alone for reducing resistance to treatment, worry levels, and interpersonal problems (e.g., Aviram & Westra, 2011; Muir et al., 2021). Finally, the first-line drugs for GAD are the SSRIs and SNRIs. In addition, buspirone may be prescribed as an adjunctive treatment when an antidepressant is only partially effective, and buspirone or a benzodiazepine may be prescribed as the sole medication when antidepressant drugs are not tolerated or are ineffective. Note that benzodiazepines are ordinarily used only for providing immediate short-term relief from acute anxiety because their long-term use can lead to the development of tolerance and physical dependence. 

**Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders:** Obsessive-compulsive disorder is included in the DSM-5-TR with body dysmorphic disorder and other disorders that share several diagnostic validators – e.g., symptoms, comorbidity, and treatment response.

1. **Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD):** OCD involves recurrent obsessions and/or compulsions that are time-consuming (consume more than one hour each day) and/or cause significant distress or impaired functioning: *Obsessions* are recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that the person experiences as intrusive and unwanted, that he/she attempts to ignore or suppress, and that usually cause marked anxiety or distress. *Compulsions* are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that the person feels driven to perform either in response to an obsession or according to rigidly applied rules. The goal of compulsions is to reduce anxiety or distress or prevent an undesirable situation from happening, but they’re excessive or not connected in a realistic way to their goal. Specifiers are used to indicate the person’s level of insight into the veracity of his/her beliefs and the presence of tics. Males have an earlier age of onset of this disorder than females do and, consequently, have a slightly higher prevalence rate than females in childhood, while females have a slightly higher prevalence rate than males in adulthood. Comorbidity is common, with the most frequent comorbid disorder being an anxiety disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2022).

OCD has been linked to heredity and brain abnormalities: A genetic component has been confirmed by twin studies that report heritability estimates ranging from 27% to 57% for adults and 45% to 65% for children (van Grootheest et al., 2012). Twin studies have generally found the concordance rate for monozygotic twins to be more than twice the size of the rate for dizygotic twins. For example, the DSM-5-TR reports concordance rates of 57% and 22% for monozygotic and dizygotic twins, respectively. Neuroimaging studies have identified several structural and functional abnormalities, including hyperactivity in the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) pathway that links the orbitofrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex with areas of the basal ganglia (e.g., caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens), the thalamus, and the amygdala and controls the execution of movement, habit formation, and reward (Radulescu et al., 2017). 

The first-line therapy for OCD is exposure and response prevention (ERP) either alone or as a component of cognitive behavior therapy (CBT with ERP). ERP for OCD is also known as exposure with ritual prevention and involves exposing patients in vivo and/or in imagination to anxiety-arousing thoughts, objects, or situations and preventing them from engaging in ritualistic behaviors that are attempts to reduce anxiety. SSRIs are also considered a first-line treatment, and research comparing the effectiveness of ERP alone, an SSRI alone, and the combination of ERP with an SSRI for adults with OCD suggests that the combined treatment is most effective, at least in some circumstances – e.g., when an SSRI alone or ERP alone has been ineffective, the patient’s obsessive-compulsive symptoms are severe, or the patient has comorbid symptoms that are known to respond to antidepressants (Dougherty et al., 2015; Skapinakis et al., 2016). In addition, there is evidence that combining motivational interviewing and CBT with ERP by providing motivational interviewing as a pretreatment may be more effective than CBT with ERP alone (Guzick et al., 2021). Finally, a meta-analysis of research assessing the effectiveness of ERP and SSRIs for children and adolescents found that ERP delivered in-person or via telehealth are about equally effective and that ERP alone and ERP plus an SSRI are more effective than an SSRI alone (Steele et al., 2025).

**2. Body Dysmorphic Disorder:** This disorder involves a preoccupation with a perceived defect or flaw in physical appearance that’s not observable or appears to be minor to other people. For the diagnosis, the person must have performed repetitive behaviors or mental acts because of the defect or flaw (e.g., mirror checking, skin picking) at some time during the course of the disorder, and the person’s preoccupation must cause significant distress or impaired functioning. People with this disorder often seek medical treatment to correct the defect or flaw, and many have ideas or delusions of reference (i.e., believe that other people are mocking or taking special notice of them because of their physical appearance).