# Bipolar and Depressive Disorders


Diagnosis of the bipolar and depressive disorders involves considering a client’s current status and history in terms of three mood episodes: A *manic episode* is characterized by an abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and increased activity or energy for at least one week. It includes three or more characteristic symptoms (e.g., inflated self-esteem or grandiosity, decreased need for sleep, flight of ideas) and marked impairment in functioning, a need for hospitalization to avoid harm to self or others, and/or the presence of psychotic features. A *hypomanic episode* is characterized by an abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood; increased activity or energy; and three or more symptoms of mania for at least four consecutive days. Symptoms are not severe enough to cause marked impairment in functioning or a need for hospitalization and do not include psychotic features. A *major depressive episode* is characterized by five or more characteristic symptoms with at least one symptom being depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in most or all activities. Symptoms last for at least two weeks and cause significant distress and/or impaired functioning.

**Bipolar Disorders:** The bipolar disorders include bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, and cyclothymic disorder. The diagnosis of *bipolar I disorder* requires at least one manic episode that may or may not have been preceded or followed by one or more major depressive or hypomanic episodes. The diagnosis of *bipolar II disorder* requires at least one hypomanic episode and at least one major depressive episode. The diagnosis of *cyclothymic disorder* requires numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms that do not meet the criteria for a hypomanic episode and numerous periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet the criteria for a major depressive episode. The minimum duration of symptoms for cyclothymic disorder is two years for adults or one year for children and adolescents.

**1. Etiology of Bipolar Disorder:**  Bipolar disorder has been linked to heredity and environmental factors. Twin studies have established that it is highly heritable, with reported heritability estimates ranging from about 60% to 90% (O’Connell & Coombes, 2021). These studies also report concordance rates that range from 40% to 80% for monozygotic twins and 5% to 30% for dizygotic twins, with some studies finding that rates are higher for female twins than male twins (Jai et al., 2021; O’Connell & Coombes, 2021). Research that distinguishes between the heritability of bipolar I and bipolar II disorders is limited, but there is some evidence that it is greater for bipolar I disorder (e.g., Song et al., 2018). Environmental risk factors include early parental loss; childhood maltreatment (especially emotional abuse); medical comorbidity (e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, asthma, migraine headache); cannabis, cocaine, and other substance use; and highly stressful life events (Marangoni et al., 2016; Rowland & Marwaha, 2018).

**2. Differential Diagnosis:** It can be difficult to distinguish between bipolar I disorder and ADHD because they share several symptoms, including distractibility, irritability, and accelerated speech. Geller et al. (2002) propose that consideration of mania symptoms that do not overlap with symptoms of ADHD can help avoid over- or under-diagnosing bipolar disorder in children and adolescents. Their research found that the most manic-specific symptoms for youth 7 to 16 years of age were elation, grandiosity, flight of ideas/racing thoughts, decreased need for sleep, and hypersexuality (e.g., unusual interest in or preoccupation with sex, using sexually explicit sexual language, engaging in developmentally inappropriate sexual behavior). With regard to adults, Salvi et al.’s (2021) review of the research found that manic episodes are typically characterized by a euphoric, elevated, or irritable mood; increased self-esteem or grandiosity; distractibility caused by thought acceleration; and a decreased need for sleep, usually without physical discomfort. In contrast, ADHD in adults is characterized by a labile, dysphoric mood; reduced self-esteem; distractibility due to wandering (but not acceleration) of thoughts; and fatigue and discomfort after a loss of sleep. Studies on sexuality generally confirm that increased sexual activity is common for adults experiencing manic episodes. However, research is inconsistent with regard to ADHD: The results of some studies suggest that adult ADHD is not associated with increased sexual activity but is associated with higher rates of sexual disorders and greater involvement in risky sexual behaviors (e.g., Barkley, Murphy, & Fisher, 2008; Soldati et al., 2020).

**3. Treatment of Bipolar Disorder:** Treatment usually consists of a combination of psychosocial interventions and pharmacotherapy. Evidence-based psychosocial interventions include psychoeducation, interpersonal and social rhythm therapy, cognitive-behavior therapy, and family-focused therapy (which is based on the assumption that high expressed emotion by family members can trigger relapse in the family member with this disorder). With regard to pharmacotherapy, lithium is usually most effective for “classic bipolar disorder” which is characterized by a low likelihood of mixed mood states and rapid cycling, long periods of recovery between episodes, and an onset between 15 and 19 years of age. In contrast, anticonvulsant drugs (e.g., carbamazepine, valproic acid) and second generation antipsychotic drugs are most effective for “atypical bipolar disorder,” which is characterized by mixed mood states, rapid cycling, a lack of full recovery between episodes, and an onset between 10 and 15 years of age (Aiken, 2018). (Note that the distinction between classic and atypical bipolar disorder is not a DSM-5-TR categorization and that DSM-5-TR provides the specifier “with atypical features” for bipolar disorder that involves mood reactivity and at least two of the following: significant weight gain or increase in appetite, hypersomnia, leaden paralysis, interpersonal rejection sensitivity.)

**Depressive Disorders:** The depressive disorders include major depressive disorder (MDD), persistent depressive disorder, and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. The diagnosis of *major depressive disorder* requires five or more symptoms of a major depressive episode for at least two weeks with at least one symptom being depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in most or all activities. The diagnosis of *persistent depressive disorder* requires a depressed mood with two or more characteristic symptoms (e.g., poor appetite or overeating, insomnia or hypersomnia, feelings of hopelessness) for at least two years in adults or one year in children and adolescents. The diagnosis of *disruptive mood dysregulation disorder* requires the presence for at least 12 months of (a) severe and recurrent temper outbursts that are verbal and/or behavioral, are grossly out of proportion to the situation or provocation, and occur three or more times each week; and (b) a persistently irritable or angry mood that is observable to others most of the day and nearly every day between outbursts.  Note that, when patients meet the diagnostic criteria for  MDD and persistent depressive disorder, both diagnoses are assigned, and the appropriate course specifier for persistent depressive disorder is recorded: with persistent major depressive episode; with intermittent major depressive episode, with current episode; or with intermittent major depressive episode, without current episode.

Specifiers provided in DSM-5-TR for MDD include with peripartum onset and with seasonal pattern: The specifier *with peripartum onset* applies when the onset of symptoms occurs during pregnancy or the four weeks after delivery. Up to 80% of women experience “baby blues” (sadness, irritability, anxiety) after the birth of their children, while a smaller percent experience symptoms that meet the criteria for MDD. Of those who do develop MDD, about 50% experienced the symptoms prior to delivery. Cognitive-behavioral therapy and interpersonal therapy are evidence-based psychotherapies for the prevention and treatment of peripartum depression (e.g., O’Connor et al., 2019; Sockol, et al., 2011). Antidepressants (especially sertraline) are also effective, but several factors must be considered before they are prescribed including the potential negative effects for the developing fetus and newborns who are being breast fed and the impact of untreated maternal depression on both the woman and her child. There is evidence that exercise reduces symptoms of peripartum depression, but the studies have produced inconsistent results about the magnitude of its effects due in part to differences in methodology: For example, the type of exercise varies from study to study, and some studies evaluate its effects as an adjunctive intervention while others have evaluated it as a stand-alone treatment. However, a meta-analysis of research comparing aerobic exercise alone to aerobic exercise with co-interventions found that exercise alone had a non-significant beneficial effect on depressive symptoms, while exercise with co-interventions was significantly more effective than the co-interventions alone (Pritchett et al., 2017).

The specifier *with seasonal pattern* applies when there’s a temporal relationship between mood episodes and time of year, which is usually winter. This disorder is also known as seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and its symptoms include hypersomnia, overeating, weight gain, and a craving for carbohydrates. It’s been linked to a lower-than-normal level of serotonin and a higher-than-normal level of melatonin, which is a hormone that plays an essential role in the sleep-wake cycle. SAD is often responsive to phototherapy which involves exposure to bright light that suppresses the production of melatonin.  

During childhood, the rates of depression are similar for boys and girls; however, the rate for females increases in early adolescence while the rate for males remains fairly stable. Explanations for this gender difference incorporate the impact of biological and psychological factors. For example, there’s evidence that the increase of hormonal levels at puberty sensitizes females but desensitizes males to the stress of negative life events (Allen, Barrett, Sheeber, & Davis, 2006). The higher rate for females persists into adulthood, with female adolescents and adults having a rate that is 1.5 to 3 times higher than the rate for male adolescents and adults.

1. **Etiology of Major Depressive Disorder:** MDD has been linked to heredity; neurotransmitter, hormone, and brain abnormalities; and cognitive and behavioral factors. With regard to heredity, twin studies report heritability estimates ranging from about 30% to 50%, with most estimates being larger for females than males (Kendall et al., 2021; Kendler et al., 2006). In addition, the average reported concordance rates are 46% for monozygotic twins and 20% for dizygotic twins, with some studies finding that concordance rates are higher for female twins than male twins (Sinclair, 2024; Kendler, 2006). There is also evidence that the personality trait of neuroticism explains a large proportion of the genetic contribution (American Psychiatric Association, 2022).

Studies looking at neurotransmitters have found that depression is related to low levels of serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine. Depression has also been associated with abnormalities in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which plays an important role in the body’s reaction to stress: Exposure to chronic stress (especially early in life) has been found to lead to persistent hyperactivity of the HPA axis and hypersecretion of cortisol, the primary stress hormone, which are associated with an increased risk for depression (Nandam et al., 2020). In addition, neuroimaging studies have linked depression to structural and functional abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex, cingulate cortex, hippocampus, caudate nucleus, putamen, amygdala, thalamus, and several other areas of the brain (e.g., Pandya, Altinay, Malone, & Anand, 2012). With regard to the prefrontal cortex, the studies have found that depression is associated with abnormally high levels of activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and abnormally low levels of activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) and that remission of depressive symptoms in response to psychotherapy or an antidepressant is associated with the opposite pattern – i.e., to decreased activity in the vmPFC and increased activity in the dlPFC (Koenigs & Grafman, 2009). 

Behavioral and cognitive explanations include Lewinsohn’s social reinforcement theory, Seligman’s learned helplessness model, and Beck’s cognitive theory: Lewinsohn’s (1974) *social reinforcement theory* describes depression as the result of a low rate of response-contingent reinforcement for social behaviors due to a lack of reinforcement in the environment and/or poor social skills. This results in social isolation, low self-esteem, pessimism, and other characteristics of depression that, in turn, further decrease the likelihood of positive reinforcement in the future. Seligman’s (1974) original version of the *learned helplessness model* links depression to repeated exposure to uncontrollable negative life events that results in a sense of helplessness, and a reformulated version stresses the role of a negative cognitive style that involves attributing negative life events to stable, internal, and global factors. The most recent revision of the model (referred to as hopelessness theory) describes a sense of hopelessness as the proximal and sufficient cause of depression which, in turn, is the result of exposure to negative events and a negative cognitive style (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989). Beck’s (1974) *cognitive theory* attributes depression to a negative cognitive triad that consists of negative thoughts about oneself, the world, and the future.

2. **Age and Cultural Factors:** There’s evidence that risk factors for major depressive disorder are somewhat age-related. For example, for younger adults, the risk has been linked to genetics, stressful life events, and limitations in problem-solving and other cognitive abilities. In contrast, for older adults, chronic medical illness has been consistently identified as one of the strongest risk factors, especially when the illness decreases physical functioning and contributes to social isolation (Blazer & Hybels, 2005; Caine, Lyness, & King, 1993; Lyness & Caine, 2000).

There’s also evidence that the experience and expression of major depressive disorder are related to age and cultural background. With regard to age, older adults are less likely than younger adults to refer to affective symptoms and more likely to refer to somatic symptoms, cognitive changes, and a loss of interest in usual activities (e.g., Fiske, Wetherell, & Gatz, 2009). With regard to cultural background, members of some Latino, Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, Asian, and other non-Western cultures report a larger number of somatic symptoms than members of Western cultures who report a larger number of psychological symptoms. For example, Ryder and his colleagues (2008) compared Chinese and Euro-Canadian outpatients and found that the Chinese patients were more likely to emphasize somatic symptoms (e.g., appetite and sleep disturbances, headaches, heart palpitations), while Euro-Canadian patients were more likely to emphasize psychological symptoms (e.g., depressed mood, loneliness, hopelessness).

3. **Comorbidity:** Major depressive disorder often co-occurs with other psychiatric disorders. A survey of U.S. adults found that, among respondents with major depressive disorder, the largest percentage reported having a comorbid substance use disorder (especially alcohol use disorder) during their lifetimes followed by, in order, an anxiety disorder and a personality disorder (Hasin et al., 2018). Depression is also associated with several sleep abnormalities including prolonged sleep latency (a longer time to fall asleep), reduced REM latency (a shortened time from sleep onset to REM sleep), reduced slow-wave (stages 3 and 4) sleep, and increased REM density (more rapid eye movements per unit of time) (Nutt, Wilson, & Paterson, 2008). Finally, depression has been linked to coronary heart disease, stroke, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, and a number of other medical conditions, with the relationship between depression and some medical conditions being bidirectional. For example, research has found depression to be independently predictive of an increased risk for myocardial infarction (a heart attack), which is a manifestation of coronary heart disease (e.g., Gan et al., 2014). There is also evidence that depression and anxiety are the psychiatric disorders that most commonly develop after a myocardial infarction, with most studies finding depression to be more common than anxiety (e.g., Kumar & Nayak, 2017; Sreenivasan et al., 2021).

4. **Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder:**   The treatment of MDD consists of psychotherapy and/or pharmacotherapy. A meta-analysis of studies comparing the effects of psychotherapy alone, pharmacotherapy alone, and combined psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for adults found that the combined treatment was more effective than either psychotherapy alone or pharmacotherapy alone in terms of both response and remission rates, with no significant differences between psychotherapy alone and pharmacotherapy alone (Cuijpers et al., 2020). As noted above, MDD and substance use disorder are frequently comorbid, and the recommended intervention for patients with both disorders is a concurrent approach that addresses the two disorders simultaneously and consists of evidence-based behavioral or cognitive behavioral interventions and pharmacotherapy (Calarco & Lobo, 2021; Coughlin et al., 2021).

APA’s (2019) *Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Depression Across Three Age Cohorts* provides treatment recommendations for children and adolescents, adults, and older adults (ages 60 and over): (a) For children, the guideline states that there is insufficient evidence to recommend any particular psychosocial or pharmacological treatment. (b) For adolescents, it recommends cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) or interpersonal psychotherapy for adolescents (IPT-A) as a psychosocial intervention and fluoxetine as a first-line medication. However, it notes there is insufficient evidence to recommend either of these treatments (psychotherapy or fluoxetine) over the other. (c) For adults, the guidelines recommend that clinicians offer patients either psychotherapy or a second-generation antidepressant (an SSRI or SNRI) as the initial treatment. The psychotherapies it recommends are CBT, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), behavioral therapy, psychodynamic therapy, and supportive therapy. For the initial treatment, the guidelines do not recommend one treatment option (psychotherapy or antidepressant) over the other or one of the psychotherapies over the others. The guidelines also suggest that the combination of CBT or IPT and an antidepressant is usually appropriate for patients with chronic or treatment-resistant depression but leave it up to the clinician and patient to decide if the combined treatment is desirable in other situations. (d) For older adults, the guideline recommends that clinicians offer patients either group cognitive-behavioral therapy (group-CBT) or the combination of IPT and a second-generation antidepressant. It also states that there is insufficient evidence for recommending self-guided bibliotherapy or life review therapy for older adults. 

Several other interventions have some research support as effective treatments for depression: (a) The use of *St. John’s wort* is supported by studies showing that it has similar therapeutic effects as SSRIs have for mild and moderate depression as well as lower dropout rates and fewer side effects (e.g., Cui & Zheng, 2016; Ng, Venkatanarayanan, & Ho, 2017). However, St. John’s wort has not been shown to be effective for severe depression, and it interacts with certain other drugs. For example, taking St. John’s wort with an SSRI or other medication that increases serotonin levels can cause serotonin syndrome, and taking it with alprazolam (Xanax), bupropion (Wellbutrin), or certain statin or immunosuppressive drugs can reduce the effectiveness of those drugs. (b) *Ketamine* has been used as an anesthetic and analgesic since the 1960s and has also been found to be effective as a fast-acting treatment for treatment-resistant depression (TRD) and suicidal ideation (e.g., Kryst et al., 2020). It exerts its therapeutic effects by increasing glutamate levels and is prescribed as a nasal spray (esketamine) that is used in conjunction with an oral antidepressant. Because of its potential for severe side effects, esketamine is self-administered under the supervision of a healthcare provider in a healthcare setting. (c) *Electroconvulsive therapy* (ECT) has been shown to have a high success rate when used to treat severe depression but is ordinarily used only when other treatments have not been effective or when the severity of symptoms requires a quick treatment response (e.g., when the individual is at high risk for suicide). An advantage of ECT is that, compared to other treatments, it has a higher response rate (a clinically meaningful reduction in symptoms), a higher remission rate (the absence or near absence of symptoms), and faster time to remission: Reported response and remission rates for ECT approach 80% and 70%, respectively (Berman, 2017), while response and remission rates for psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy are 30 to 60% and 25 to 45%, respectively (Steidtmann & Arnow, 2017). With regard to time to remission, ECT produces remission within 1 to 3 weeks compared to 6 to 10 weeks for IPT or CBT and 4 to 12 weeks for antidepressant medications (Rush et al., 2006). A disadvantage of ECT is that it causes both anterograde amnesia (an inability to form new memories after ECT) and retrograde amnesia (an inability to recall events that occurred before ECT): Anterograde amnesia usually resolves within a few weeks after the last ECT session. Retrograde amnesia affects recently acquired memories more than remote memories. It begins to resolve within weeks to several months after the last ECT session, with older memories returning before more recent ones. However, many patients experience persistent gaps in memory for events that occurred pre-ECT. Retrograde amnesia is more severe for bilateral placement of electrodes than for right unilateral placement and for a larger number of treatment sessions and less time between sessions (Weiner & Husain, 2015). (d) *Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation* (rTMS) is a noninvasive technique that uses a magnetic field to stimulate the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and is most often used as an intervention for treatment-resistant depression. A disadvantage of rTMS is that it has lower response and remission rates than does ECT (Ren et al., 2014). However, in contrast to ECT, rTMS does not require sedation or cause memory loss. (e) A meta-analysis of studies comparing *telepsychology* and face-to-face psychotherapy found that the two approaches had similar outcomes in terms of depressive symptom severity, quality of life, client satisfaction, and the therapeutic alliance (Scott et al., 2022). (f) A number of studies have evaluated the effectiveness of *physical activity and exercise* for reducing symptoms of depression. Based on the results of their systematic review and meta-analysis of the research, Pearce et al. (2022) conclude that physical activity reduces depressive symptoms even when activity is at levels lower than public health recommendations. In addition, research comparing the effectiveness of physical exercise, therapy, and antidepressants has provided some evidence that they can have comparable effects on the symptoms of mild to moderate depression and that adding exercise to therapy or antidepressants improves their effectiveness (Fabiano et al., 2025). There is also evidence that the positive effects of aerobic exercise on depression are due, at least in part, to its beneficial impact on areas of cognitive functioning (e.g., memory, executive functioning, reward processing) that are ordinarily impaired in individuals with this disorder (Tian et al., 2025).

**Suicide in the United States:** Research has identified a number of demographic characteristics that are associated with an increased risk for suicide and suicidality (suicidal ideation and suicide attempts): 

(a) Data collected in 2022 by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Curtin et al., 2023; Garnett & Curtin, 2024) found the following: The suicide rate for males was four times higher than the rate for females. For males, the highest suicide rate was for those ages 75 and older; for females, the highest rate was for those ages 45 to 64. For both males and females, suicide rates were highest for non-Hispanic American Indian/Alaskan Native individuals.  

(b) Data collected by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (2024) found that, in 2022, suicide rates among veterans were significantly higher than rates among non-veterans: Specifically, the rate per 100,000 was 34.7 for veterans and 17.1 for non-veterans. 

(c) A number of studies have confirmed that the suicide rates of incarcerated and previously incarcerated individuals are higher than the rate for members of the general population. In addition, based on the results of their systematic review and meta-analysis of the research, Janca et al. (2023) conclude that the suicide rate for previously incarcerated individuals is higher than the rate for currently incarcerated individuals. These investigators also found that, in contrast to the general population in which men have higher rates of suicide than women, among previously incarcerated individuals, men and women have similar rates of suicide because the increased rate following release from incarceration is three times greater for women than for men. They conclude that this “may indicate that women released from incarceration are particularly vulnerable to suicide, because their rates of suicide are so high that they reach the same level as men released from incarceration” (p. 365).  

(d) There is evidence that suicide rates are higher for transgender than cisgender individuals, but it has been difficult to determine the specific difference in rates due to a lack of reliable data (Clark & Blosnich, 2024). However, a number of studies have found that transgender youth and adults have higher rates of suicidality. For example, data collected from nearly 30,000 patients at a community health center (Kirakosian et al., 2023) revealed that a larger proportion of transgender women reported suicidal ideation (23.6%) than did transgender men (17.4%), cisgender women (6.6%), and cisgender men (6.1%). In addition, the results of the U.S. Transgender Population Health Survey found that transgender adults reported lifetime rates of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts of 81% and 42%, respectively, while cisgender adults reported lifetime rates of 35% and 11%, respectively (Kidd et al., 2023).