# Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders


This category includes substance-use and substance-induced disorders for 10 classes of substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; phencyclidine and other hallucinogens; inhalants; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants; tobacco; and other/unknown. 

**Substance-Use Disorders:** The DSM-5-TR describes substance use disorders as involving “a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and physiological symptoms indicating that the individual continues using the substance despite significant substance-related problems” (p. 544). Substance use disorder can be diagnosed for all classes of substances except caffeine and are further described with specifiers to indicate the severity of the disorder (which is determined by the number of symptoms) and if the person is in early or sustained remission, on maintenance therapy, or in a controlled environment. For the diagnosis of all of these disorders, the person must have two or more characteristic symptoms within a 12-month period.  

**Substance-Induced Disorders:** These disorders include substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, and substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., substance-induced depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, major neurocognitive disorder, withdrawal delirium). In addition, hallucinogen-induced disorders include hallucinogen persisting perceptual disorder. The symptoms of some of these disorders are summarized below: 

**1. Alcohol Intoxication:** This disorder involves problematic behavioral and psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment) with at least 1 of 6 symptoms: slurred speech, incoordination, unsteady gait, nystagmus, impaired attention or memory, stupor or coma.

**2. Alcohol Withdrawal:** The diagnosis of this disorder requires at least two of eight symptoms that develop within several hours to a few days following cessation or reduction of heavy and prolonged alcohol use: autonomic hyperactivity, hand tremor, insomnia, nausea or vomiting, transient hallucinations or illusions, anxiety, psychomotor agitation, generalized tonic-clonic seizures.

**3. Alcohol-Induced Major Neurocognitive Disorder:** This diagnosis requires evidence of a significant decline in one or more cognitive domains that interferes with independence in everyday activities. A specifier is used to indicate if the disorder is the nonamnestic-confabulatory type or amnestic-confabulatory type. The latter type is also referred to as Korsakoff syndrome, which has been linked to a thiamine deficiency and involves anterograde and retrograde amnesia and confabulation.

**4. Opioid Intoxication:** This disorder involves significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., initial euphoria followed by apathy or dysphoria and impaired judgment) plus pupillary constriction and the development of at least one of three symptoms during or shortly after opioid use: drowsiness or coma, slurred speech, impaired attention or memory. Opioid intoxication can occur with or without perceptual disturbances, which are hallucinations with intact reality testing or illusions in the absence of delirium. Opioids include opium, heroin, morphine, and codeine, which are derived from the opium poppy, and synthetic and partly-synthetic drugs, which include methadone, oxycodone, hydrocodone, and fentanyl.  

**5. Opioid Withdrawal:** This diagnosis requires the development of at least three of nine symptoms following cessation of heavy and prolonged opioid use or administration of an opioid antagonist after opioid use: e.g., dysphoric mood, nausea or vomiting, muscle aches, diarrhea, yawning, fever, insomnia.  

**6. Stimulant Intoxication:** Stimulant Intoxication is characterized by maladaptive behavioral and psychological changes (e.g., euphoria or affective blunting, hypervigilance, interpersonal sensitivity, anxiety or anger, impaired judgment) and the development of at least two of nine symptoms during or shortly after stimulant use: tachycardia or bradycardia, pupillary dilation, elevated or lowered blood pressure, perspiration or chills, nausea or vomiting, weight loss, psychomotor agitation or retardation, respiratory depression or cardiac arrhythmia, seizures or coma. Stimulant drugs include amphetamines, methamphetamines, and cocaine.

**7. Stimulant Withdrawal:** This diagnosis requires a dysphoric mood and at least two of five physiological changes that develop within a few hours to several days after cessation of prolonged stimulant use: fatigue, vivid and unpleasant dreams, insomnia or hypersomnia, increased appetite, psychomotor agitation or retardation. 

**8. Tobacco Withdrawal.** This disorder involves at least four of seven symptoms that develop within 24 hours of abrupt cessation or reduction of the use of tobacco: irritability, anger or anxiety, impaired concentration, increased appetite, restlessness, depressed mood, insomnia. Note that the duration and severity of withdrawal symptoms vary for different levels of addiction but ordinarily peak 48 to 72 hours following cessation of nicotine use and then gradually wane over several weeks. Cravings for nicotine last longer than withdrawal symptoms and can be the cause of early and late relapses (Rigotti, 2009).

**9. Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder:** This disorder involves reexperiencing at least one of the perceptual symptoms that were experienced while intoxicated with LSD or other hallucinogen, with symptoms causing significant distress or impairment. Visual disturbances (e.g., flashes of color, halos around objects) are most common. Episodes (“flashbacks”) are often very brief but may recur over days, weeks, months, or longer. Reality testing during episodes is intact (i.e., the person is aware that current symptoms are due to previous drug use).  

**Treatment of Substance-Related Disorders:** The treatment of substance use disorders varies, depending on the type of substance(s), the severity of the disorder, the presence of comorbidities, and the person’s preferences. However, treatment ordinarily includes individual, family, and/or group interventions and medication. Evidence-based interventions include cognitive behavioral therapy, motivational interviewing, contingency management, family behavior therapy, the community reinforcement approach, personalized normative feedback, text messages, relapse prevention therapy, and 12-step facilitation. Research has generally found that combined interventions are most effective for substance use disorders. As an example, studies evaluating treatments for tobacco use disorder suggest that therapy (especially therapy that includes critical thinking skills training and social support) and medication (especially nicotine nasal spray and varenicline) are each effective when used alone but that the combination of therapy and medication is most effective (Fiore et al., 2008). (Information about medications used to treat substance use disorders is provided in the physiological psychology and pharmacology content summary.)

**1. Community Reinforcement Approach (CRA):** The CRA is based on the principles of operant conditioning and “helps people arrange their lifestyles so that healthy, drugfree living becomes rewarding and thereby competes with alcohol and drug use” (Meyers, Roozen, & Smith, 2011, p. 380). Community reinforcement and family training (CRAFT) was derived from CRA but was designed for individuals who refuse to seek treatment for their substance abuse problems. Consequently, rather than focusing on the person with the substance use disorder (the identified patient), a CRAFT therapist works with a concerned significant other (CSO) who is a family member or close friend. The primary goals of CRAFT are to (a) help the CSO influence the identified patient to enter substance-use treatment, (b) teach the CSO procedures to help reduce the identified patient’s substance use, and (c) help the CSO make positive life changes that improve the CSO’s quality of life whether or not the identified patient enters treatment (Westreich & Leventhal, 2011). 

**2. Voucher-Based Reinforcement Therapy (VBRT):** VBRT is a type of contingency management that involves giving patients vouchers that can be exchanged for goods and services in the community when they achieve treatment goals (e.g., negative urine drug screens). Research has found that VBRT is effective as a stand-alone treatment for promoting abstinence for a number of substances, including cocaine, opiates, marijuana, and tobacco (Lussier et al., 2006). However, some experts suggest that combining VBRT with another intervention may be the optimal approach. For example, in his summary of treatments for cocaine use disorder, Kampman (2019) points out that the studies have shown that VBRT is useful for promoting initial abstinence but that its effects fade when vouchers are discontinued. In contrast, cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) is less useful for promoting initial abstinence but helps patients maintain abstinence following treatment because it provides them with coping skills they can continue to use post-treatment.

**3. Personalized Normative Feedback (PNF):** PNF is based on the assumption that, “if perceptions of the prevalence of a given behavior influence one’s own behavior … and one overestimates the prevalence of that behavior, then correcting this misperception should reduce the behavior” (Neighbors et al., 2010, p. 378). Use of this intervention involves providing clients with information that allows them to compare the frequency of their own behavior and their perceived frequency for a typical person in their peer group to the actual average frequency for people in their peer group. For example, when using PNF to reduce a college student’s alcohol consumption, the student may be given three bar graphs: one that indicates the client’s frequency of drinking, another that indicates the client’s perceptions of a typical college student’s frequency of drinking, and another that indicates the actual average frequency of drinking of college students. PNF was initially developed as a brief stand-alone intervention for heavy-drinking college students in response to research which found that college students tend to over-estimate the amount and frequency of alcohol use of their peers and that this misperception is associated with higher levels of alcohol consumption (Baer, Stacy, & Larimer, 1991; Neighbors et al., 2015). It has since been applied to other populations and other substance use disorders, gambling disorder, eating disorders, intimate partner violence, and other problematic behaviors and has been found to be effective both as stand-alone intervention and in combination with motivational interviewing or other interventions. 

**4. Text-Messages**: Text messages have been found to be a useful intervention for several mental health conditions, including substance use disorders, schizophrenia, and affective disorders. When used as a mental health intervention, text messages serve four major functions (Berrouiguet et al., 2016): They provide appointment and medication reminders, health care information, support, and a means of self-monitoring. A number of studies have confirmed the effectiveness of text messaging as a smoking cessation intervention when used as a stand-alone treatment or in combination with other interventions: For example, Whittaker et al.’s (2019) meta-analysis of the research found that (a) text message smoking cessation interventions alone produced higher quit rates than did minimal smoking cessation support (e.g., general health advice provided by a clinician); (b) text messaging alone and other smoking cessation interventions alone (e.g., brief smoking cessation counseling, internet-based interactive smoking cessation program) produced similar quit rates; and (c) text messaging plus other smoking cessation interventions produced higher quit rates than did the other interventions alone.  

**5. Relapse Prevention Therapy (RPT):** Marlatt and Gordon’s RPT (1985; Larimer, Palmer, & Marlatt, 1999) is a cognitive-behavioral approach to relapse prevention. It describes substance addiction as a “learned habit pattern” and views lapses following a period of abstinence as being precipitated by a high-risk situation (e.g., a negative emotional state, interpersonal conflict, social pressure). It also proposes that a lapse is most likely to turn into a full-blown relapse when the person has poor coping skills, low self-efficacy, and high expectations about the positive effects of alcohol and responds to the lapse with an “abstinence violation effect” – i.e., with negative emotions, guilt, and a sense of personal failure. RPT utilizes cognitive and behavioral strategies that enable clients to recognize and deal more effectively with high-risk situations. Strategies include training in coping skills, enhancing self-efficacy, challenging myths about the positive outcomes of substance use, cognitive restructuring to view lapses as mistakes rather than the result of personal failure, and altering lifestyle factors that increase exposure or reduce resistance to high-risk situations. 

**6. Project MATCH:** Project MATCH, a multisite clinical trial, compared the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral coping skills therapy, motivational enhancement therapy, and twelve-step facilitation for clients who had received a DSM-III-R diagnosis of alcohol dependence or abuse. It also evaluated the client-treatment matching hypothesis, which predicts that client outcomes can be improved by matching clients with certain characteristics to treatments most appropriate for those characteristics. Clients were randomly assigned to one of the three treatments, and clients in each group were categorized in terms of several characteristics (e.g., alcohol involvement, psychiatric severity, anger, and social support for drinking versus abstinence). Results indicated that, at one-year and three-year follow-ups, all three treatments had produced significant reductions in drinking, with twelve-step facilitation having a slight advantage over the other two treatments. The results also provided some support for the matching hypothesis. For example, at the three-year follow-up, clients whose social networks were supportive of drinking benefited most from twelve-step facilitation, while clients who were high in anger benefited most from motivational enhancement therapy (Project MATCH Research Group, 1997, 1998).
