# Satisfaction, Commitment, and Stress


**Satisfaction and Commitment:** **in Domain 3, Social and Cultural Bases of Behavior** Job satisfaction and organizational commitment are two job attitudes that have been extensively studied.

1. **Individual Contributors to Job Satisfaction:** There’s evidence that level of job satisfaction is stable over time and across jobs and careers (e.g., Staw, Bell, & Clausen, 1986). This stability has been linked to (a) *self-esteem*, with higher levels of self-esteem being associated with higher levels of both job satisfaction and life satisfaction (Judge, Locke, Durham, & Kluger, 1998); (b) *affective disposition*, which is the tendency to respond to a variety of situations in a similarly favorable or unfavorable way (Judge & Hulin, 1993); and (c) a *genetic predisposition* to respond to work in a particular way. Evidence for a genetic contribution is provided by Arvey, Bouchard, Segal, and Abraham’s (1989) study of male identical twins separated soon after birth, which found that twins had similar levels of job satisfaction as adults. Based on their data, these investigators concluded that about 30% of observed variability in job satisfaction scores is attributable to genetic factors.

2. **Organizational Justice and Job Satisfaction:** A distinction is made between three types of organizational justice: (a) *Distributive justice* refers to the fairness of the distribution of resources and other outcomes. (b) *Procedural justice* refers to the fairness of the procedures used to determine outcomes. (c) *Interactional justice* refers to the fairness of the way that outcomes are communicated to workers and is divided into two subtypes (Colquitt, 2001): interpersonal (how people are treated in interactions) and informational (how information is explained). All three types are positively related to job satisfaction, with no clear consensus about which type is most highly related (e.g., Cohen-Charash & Spector, 2001).

3. **Outcomes of Job Satisfaction:** Job satisfaction has been linked to longevity and psychological and physical health, with the correlation between satisfaction and psychological health being somewhat higher than the correlation between satisfaction and physical health (Faragher, Cass, & Cooper, 2005; Palmore, 1960). It has also been linked to job performance, absenteeism, turnover, and a variety of other job outcomes, but the correlation coefficients vary somewhat from study to study and tend to be low to moderate. For example, Iaffaldano and Muchinsky’s (1985) meta-analysis of the research found the average correlation coefficient for job satisfaction and performance to be .17. However, Judge, Thoresen, Bono, and Patton (2001) argued that the methodology of the Iaffaldano and Muchinsky study was flawed, and their analysis produced a coefficient of .30. In addition, the direction of the causal relationship between job satisfaction and performance continues to be debated, and a number of researchers have pointed out that the relationship between satisfaction and performance is moderated by other variables. For example, there’s evidence that the relationship between satisfaction and performance is stronger when pay and other reinforcers are closely linked to performance, which suggests that reinforcement is a moderator variable and that performance affects satisfaction rather than vice versa (Podsakoff & Williams, 1986). 

4. **Organizational Commitment:** There are three main types of organizational commitment (Meyer, Allen, & Smith, 1998): (a) *Affective commitment* is the extent of an employee’s emotional attachment to the organization, (b) *continuance commitment* is the extent to which an employee believes he or she must stay with the organization for financial reasons or because of a lack of alternative opportunities, and (c) *normative commitment* is the extent to which an employee is loyal to the organization and feels obligated to stay with it. Organizational commitment has low to moderate correlation coefficients with various job outcome measures, with coefficients being somewhat larger for satisfaction than for performance or turnover (Brown, 1996).  Also, of the three types of commitment, affective commitment is most highly and consistently correlated with a variety of job outcomes (e.g., Meyer, Stanley, Herscovitch, & Topolnytsky, 2002).

**Stress and Burnout:** **in Domain 2, Cognitive-affective Bases of Behavior** Stress refers to “any force that pushes a psychological or physical function beyond its range of stability, producing a strain [undesirable personal outcome] within the individual” (Levy, 2013, p. 325). Responses, sources, and consequences of stress are described below:

1. **General Adaptation Syndrome:** Selye (1976) proposed that people respond physically to all types of stressors with the same sequence of three stages, and he referred to this response as the general adaptation syndrome (GAS):

(a) During the initial *alarm reaction stage*, the hypothalamus secretes corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) which activates the sympathetic nervous system and stimulates the adrenal medulla to release epinephrine and norepinephrine. CRH also stimulates the pituitary gland to release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) which, in turn, stimulates the adrenal cortex to release cortisol. Elevated levels of epinephrine, norepinephrine, and cortisol increase heart and respiration rates and glucose levels and cause other physical changes that enable the body to respond to a stressor with a fight-or-flight response. [Note that some authors describe the release of ACTH as the beginning of the transition to the next stage of the GAS (e.g., Banasik, 2021).]
(b) If the stressor persists, the *resistance stage* begins. During this stage, some physiological functions return to normal while cortisol continues to circulate at an elevated level. This helps the body maintain a high energy level and cope with the stressor. 

(c) If the stressor or its effects are not overcome or resolved, the *exhaustion stage* begins. In this stage, the pituitary gland and adrenal gland lose their ability to maintain elevated hormone levels, and physiological processes begin to break down.

Prolonged exposure to stress can have a number of undesirable consequences due, in part, to chronically elevated levels of cortisol and other stress hormones. These consequences include suppression of the body’s immune system which causes an increase in the body’s susceptibility to infection, an increase in blood pressure that can lead to a heart attack, and an elevated risk for other problems such as headaches, indigestion, and insomnia. There’s also evidence that a chronically elevated level of cortisol can damage cells in the hippocampus which impairs the ability to form new long-term memories.  

2. **Sources of Stress:** Sources of work-related stress include a lack of control over work-related factors, work-family conflict, and downsizing:

(a) *Lack of control* over scheduling, the pace of work, and other work-related factors has been linked to higher levels of stress, psychological and physical symptoms, and poorer job outcomes. For example, Spector’s (1986) meta-analysis of the research indicated that low perceived control at work is related to job dissatisfaction, reduced job performance, emotional distress, and health problems. The research has also linked machine-paced (versus self-paced) work to higher-than-normal levels of the stress hormone cortisol (Frankenhaeuser & Johansson, 1986).

(b) *Work-family conflict* occurs when “workers experience conflict between the roles they fulfill at work and the roles they fulfill in their personal life” (Landy & Conte, 2016, p. 375). It’s a major source of stress and has been linked to a number of undesirable outcomes. For example, employees who report a high level of work-family conflict tend to be less satisfied with their jobs and their lives than those who report a low level of conflict (Kossek & Ozeki, 1998). With regard to gender, Schockley et al.’s (2017) meta-analysis of research conducted in the United States, Europe, and Asia found that men and women reported similar levels of work-family conflict. Although these investigators identified some gender differences when certain moderator variables were considered, these differences were small in magnitude. For instance, for samples that included only dual-earner couples, men reported slightly greater work-to-family interference, while women reported slightly greater family-to-work interference.

(c) *Downsizing* refers to the planned elimination of jobs to maximize efficiency and reduce labor costs. It’s not only a major source of stress for employees who lose their jobs but also for those who retain them. The research has found that survivors of downsizing often exhibit a *survivor syndrome* that’s characterized by reduced job satisfaction and organizational commitment, a sense of loss of control, somatic symptoms, anxiety, depression, insomnia, and guilt about being a survivor. It has been attributed to several factors including a sense of unfairness and reduction in trust caused by the organization’s violation of the psychological contract – i.e., the “implied exchange relationship that exists between an employee and the organization” (Muchinsky, 2012, p. 318). To reduce the negative effects of downsizing for both victims and survivors, the procedures the organization will use to determine which employees will be laid off should be fair and communicated in a clear way to employees (Aamodt, 2013).

3. **Job Burnout:** Job burnout is a potential consequence of chronic work-related stress. As defined by Maslach and her colleagues (Maslach, Jackson, & Leiter, 1996; Maslach, Schaufeli, & Leiter, 2001), it has *three core characteristics*: exhaustion, depersonalization and cynicism, and a sense of inefficacy. An early sign of burnout is an increase in the time and effort put into work without an increase in productivity, and it is often accompanied by irritability, negativity, social withdrawal, and somatic symptoms (Sears, Rudisill, & Mason-Sears, 2006). An increased risk for burnout has been linked to a number of individual, job, and organizational factors. For example, Maslach, Schaufeli, and Leiter (2001) propose that the risk increases when there’s a mismatch between the individual and six aspects of the work environment: workload, control, reward, community, fairness, and values.

4. **Resistance to Stress:** Individual characteristics that have been linked to resistance to stress include hardiness, organization-based self-esteem, and the Type A behavior pattern:

(a) *Hardiness:* Kobasa (1982) has identified hardiness as a personality trait that increases a person’s resistance to the harmful effects of stress. Hardy individuals have a sense of control over their own lives, a sense of commitment to family and work, and a tendency to view new experiences as challenges rather than threats. Studies have confirmed that hardiness not only increases resistance to stress but is also associated with better physical and mental health.

(b) *Organization-based self-esteem* (OBSE): OBSE refers to “employees’ perceptions of their value as organization members” (Levy, 2013, p. 296). In addition to being associated with higher levels of job satisfaction and organizational commitment, it has been linked to job stress, with people with low levels of OBSE being more affected by stress and more passive in coping with it than those with high levels of OBSE (Schultz & Schultz, 2016).

(c) *Type A Behavior:* In contrast to hardiness and OBSE, the Type A behavior pattern is associated with increased susceptibility to the negative effects of stress. As described by Friedman and Rosenman (1959), it’s characterized by a chronic sense of time urgency, excessive competitiveness, and hostility and has been linked to an increased risk for coronary heart disease. The research is not entirely consistent, but there’s some evidence that, of the core characteristics, hostility is most associated with an increased risk for heart disease (e.g., Krantz & McCeney, 2002; Newman et al., 2011). 

