# Theories of Motivation


A number of theories have been offered to explain the factors that contribute to motivation. One of the earliest theories was Hull’s (1943) drive-reduction theory, which is based on the assumption that humans are motivated to maintain a state of equilibrium (homeostasis). Hull proposed that an unfulfilled innate physiological need causes an uncomfortable state of disequilibrium and a drive to restore equilibrium by engaging in behaviors that fulfill the need. He also stated that, when a behavior is reinforced by satisfying a need, the behavior is likely to become a habit that is repeated whenever the need arises. Drive-reduction theory was the dominant theory of motivation in the 1940s and 1950s but was then replaced by a number of other theories due to recognition of its limitations. For example, the theory does not explain drives that are unrelated to physiological needs (e.g., the drive to seek power) or why people engage in behaviors when an unfulfilled physiological need is not present (e.g., eat in the absence of hunger). Theories that were subsequently developed to explain work motivation include the following: 

1. **Acquired Needs Theory:** McClelland’s (1961) acquired needs theory focuses on the impact of acquired psychological needs on motivation and proposes that these needs are shaped by early experiences. He distinguished between three acquired needs that contribute to work motivation: People who have a *high need for achievement* are motivated by a desire for success in accomplishing their goals. They prefer tasks of moderate difficulty and risk (i.e., that have a 50/50 chance of being successfully accomplished); they want to assume personal responsibility for accomplishing tasks and, therefore, prefer not to delegate work to others; and they desire clear and frequent feedback about their performance. People with a high *need for power* are motivated by opportunities to control and influence other people and to gain status, prestige, and recognition. People with a high *need for affiliation* want to be liked and accepted by others and are motivated by opportunities to form relationships and interact with others.

2. **Need Hierarchy Theory:** Maslow’s (1970) need hierarchy theory is based on the assumption that people have *five basic needs* that emerge in a hierarchical order from most basic to most complex. In order, the needs are physiological, safety, social, esteem, and self-actualization. This theory also assumes that the lowest unfulfilled need in the hierarchy is the strongest motivator (is “prepotent”) and that, once a need is satisfied, it ceases to motivate behavior and the next need in the hierarchy becomes the primary source of motivation.  An exception is self-actualization, which is never completely satisfied.

3. **Two-Factor Theory:** Herzberg’s (1966) two-factor theory addresses both motivation and satisfaction and predicts that satisfaction and dissatisfaction are independent states that are affected by different factors: *Hygiene factors* (e.g., pay, benefits, and working conditions) are also known as job context factors and fulfill lower-order needs. When hygiene factors are not adequate, a worker is dissatisfied, but the availability of adequate hygiene factors does not contribute to satisfaction or motivation. In contrast, *motivator factors* (e.g., opportunities for responsibility, challenge, and advancement) are also known as job content factors and fulfill higher-order needs. When motivator factors are adequate, a worker is both satisfied and motivated, but the absence of motivator factors does not cause dissatisfaction. Herzberg developed *job enrichment* as a method of designing jobs so they provide motivator factors. Job enrichment can be applied to different types of jobs, but its effects depend on certain worker characteristics. For example, it tends to have the most positive outcomes for younger and well-educated workers and workers who have a high need for achievement. Note that job enlargement is also a type of job redesign but just involves adding new tasks to the job. Although job enlargement may help alleviate boredom, it’s not likely to have a significant effect on satisfaction and motivation.

4. **Job Characteristics Model:** The job characteristics model (Hackman & Oldham, 1980) proposes that jobs vary with regard to *five core job characteristics* – skill variety, task identity, task significance, autonomy, and feedback – and that these characteristics affect three critical psychological states of workers: When a job provides adequate skill variety, task identity, and task significance, workers experience their jobs as meaningful; when the job provides opportunities to act autonomously, workers feel responsible for the outcomes of their work; and when the job provides regular performance feedback, workers have knowledge of the results of their efforts. The three psychological states, in turn, have positive effects on workers’ job motivation, satisfaction, and performance. Hackman and Oldham also contend that job outcomes are moderated by *growth-need strength*: Workers with high growth-need strength (those who seek to fulfill higher-order needs) are more likely than those with low growth-need strength to be positively affected by a job that provides the five core characteristics.

5. **Equity Theory:** Equity theory (Adams, 1965) attributes a worker’s level of motivation to social comparisons and proposes that workers compare their own inputs (what they contribute to work) and outcomes (the pay and other reinforcers they receive from work) to the inputs and outcomes of workers doing the same or a similar job. When the *input/outcome ratios* are similar, workers experience a state of equity (fairness) and are motivated to maintain their current performance levels. However, when the ratios differ, workers experience a state of inequity and are motivated to act in ways that will establish equity. There are two types of inequity: Overpayment inequity occurs when a worker perceives his/her input-outcome ratio to be less than that of others (less work for more pay), and it motivates the worker to increase his/her work quality or quantity. Underpayment inequity occurs when a worker perceives his/her input-outcome ratio to be greater than that of others (more work for less pay), and it motivates the worker to decrease his/her work quality and/or quantity or attempt to obtain better outcomes. Not surprisingly, underpayment inequity has a stronger impact than overpayment on worker motivation and performance.

6. **Expectancy Theory:** Expectancy theory (Vroom, 1964) is also known as VIE theory and describes job motivation as the result of three factors: (a) the worker’s belief that effort will lead to successful performance (*expectancy*); (b) the worker’s belief that successful performance will result in certain outcomes (*instrumentality*); and (c) the value of those outcomes for the worker (*valence*). According to this theory, a worker’s motivation will be high only when all three factors are positive.

7. **Goal-Setting Theory:** Goal-setting theory (Latham & Locke, 2007; Locke & Latham, 2002) is based on the assumption that the most important contributor to a worker’s motivation to achieve goals is the worker’s acceptance of and commitment to those goals. Studies have found that *goal acceptance and commitment* are maximized when goals are specific and moderately difficult and when workers are provided with immediate feedback about their accomplishment of goals. Other research on goal-setting theory has found the following: (a) Participation in goal-setting is not necessary for goal commitment except in certain circumstances. For example, participation increases commitment when the worker has a high need for achievement or is not likely to accept assigned goals. (b) When workers participate in setting their own goals, the goals tend to be more difficult than the goals the supervisor would have set alone (Erez & Arad, 1986). (c) Group goals result in better performance than individual goals do when the accomplishment of a task requires a high degree of worker interdependence and, in this situation, group goals alone are likely to be as effective as group goals plus individual goals (Mitchell, Thompson, & George-Falvy, 2000).