# Career Choice and Development


Career choice and development have become increasingly important in organizations due to several factors such as increasing globalization and competition, changes in workforce demographics, rapid changes in technology, and a shift in the typical career path from a traditional linear path to a multidirectional path (Rothmann & Cooper, 2013; Werner & DeSimone, 2012). The major theories of career choice and development are summarized below. Note that several theories share basic concepts: Some form of self-identity is a component of the theories of Super, Holland, and Krumboltz; and person-environment congruence is central to Holland’s and Dawis and Lofquist’s theories.

1. **Super’s Life-Space, Life-Span Career Theory:** Super’s (Super, Savickas, & Super, 1996) theory distinguishes between five *stages of career development*: growth (birth to 14), exploration (15 to 24), establishment (25 to 44), maintenance (45 to 64), and disengagement (65+). The five stages act as a maxi-cycle over the entire lifespan and as mini-cycles of much shorter duration during the transitions between stages and within a stage when a person is dealing with an expected or unexpected career change. Each stage involves a different set of development tasks, and “career maturity” (“career adaptability” for adults) refers to a person’s ability to successfully complete the tasks of his or her stage.
Super used the term *life-space* to refer to the various life roles a person assumes at different times and in different contexts (e.g., child, student, worker, parent). He proposed that each person has a unique life-space due to differences in needs, interests, values, and other personal factors and in family, cultural, and other situational factors. The life-career rainbow is one of the illustrations Super created to assist with career counseling. It depicts the relationship between a person’s life stages and major life roles over his/her lifespan.

*Self-concept* is a central concept in Super’s theory and refers to how people perceive themselves and their situations. It develops over the lifespan and is the result of interactions between internal (personal) factors and external (situational) factors. According to Super, a person’s self-concept influences and is influenced by a person’s career development process and is the major determinant of the person’s career decisions.
2. **Holland’s Theory of Career Choice:** Holland (1985) distinguished between six *personality and work environment type*s (“RIASEC”): realistic, investigative, artistic, social, enterprising, and conventional. He depicted the types arranged around a hexagon, with the types closest to each other in the hexagon being most similar and those farthest from each other being most dissimilar. For example, investigative is closest (and most similar) to realistic and artistic and farthest (and most dissimilar) from enterprising.

Holland proposed that people are most productive and satisfied at work when there’s a high degree of congruence (“goodness-of-fit”) between a person’s personality and the characteristics of the work environment. For example, people who obtain the highest score on the realistic scale of Holland’s Self-Directed Search have the best job outcomes if they choose a realistic job that involves working with tools, machines, and other material things. Holland also proposed that a personality/work environment match is most predictive of job outcomes when the person’s score profile on the Self-Directed Search indicates a high degree of *differentiation* – that is, when the person obtains a high score on one personality type and low scores on the other five types. Finally, Holland defined vocational identity as “the clear and stable picture of one’s goals, interests, and talents” (1997, p. 5) and argued that people with well-formed (versus diffuse) vocational identities feel more confident about making career decisions.

3. **Dawis and Lofquist’s Theory of Work Adjustment:**  Dawis and Lofquist (1984) propose that congruence between certain characteristics of an employee and the employee’s work environment predict the person’s job tenure, which they identify as the primary indicator of work adjustment. More specifically, their theory is based on the assumption that tenure is the result of two factors – satisfaction and satisfactoriness. *Satisfaction* refers to the employee’s satisfaction with the job. It’s affected by the match between the employee’s needs and the reinforcers provided by the job and determines whether the employee stays on-the-job or quits. *Satisfactoriness* refers to the employer’s satisfaction with the employee. It’s affected by how well the employee’s skills match the skill requirements of the job and determines whether the employer retains or fires the employee. 

4. **Tiedeman’s Career Decision-Making Model:** The career decision-making model developed by Tiedeman and his colleagues (Miller-Tiedeman & Tiedeman, 1990; Tiedeman & O’Hara, 1963) views *vocational identity development* as an ongoing decision-making process that’s linked to Erikson’s psychosocial stages of ego identity development. It distinguishes between two phases of career decision-making: (a) The initial *anticipation phase* includes the exploration, crystallization, choice, and clarification stages. During this phase, the person becomes familiar with different jobs, makes a tentative job choice, and prepares to implement that choice. (b) Next is the *implementation phase*, which includes the induction, reformation, and integration stages. During this phase, the person begins the chosen job, becomes proficient at it, and achieves a balance between his/her needs and the organization’s demands. According to Tiedeman et al., career decision-making is not always a single linear process; instead, stages may be repeated, skipped, or occur in a different order. 

5. **Krumboltz’s Social Learning Theory of Career Decision-Making**: Krumboltz’s (1996) theory combines elements of classical behaviorism, Bandura’s social learning theory, and the cognitive behavior therapies of Ellis and Beck. It identifies four factors that contribute to career decisions: (a) *genetic endowment and special abilities* that may enable or limit a person’s career choices, (b) *environmental conditions and events* that may be beyond the person’s control, (c) *instrumental and associative learning experiences*, and (d) *task approach skills* (e.g., performance standards, problem-solving skills, work habits) that result from interactions among the other three factors. Krumboltz’s theory also proposes that interactions among these factors contribute to two types of generalization that guide a person’s career decisions and behaviors: Self-observation generalizations are beliefs that people have about their own attitudes, values, interests, and skills, while worldview generalizations are beliefs that people have about the world and are used to predict future events. According to Krumboltz, to promote their career development, individuals must have opportunities to “be exposed to the widest array of learning experiences” (Mitchell & Krumboltz, 1990, p. 168).

6. **Driver and Brousseau’s Career Concept Model:** The model developed by Driver, Brousseau, and their colleagues (Brousseau, 1984; Driver, 1979; Larsson, Brousseau, Kling, & Sweet, 2014) distinguishes between four career concepts that differ in terms of key motives, direction of career movement, and frequency of career change: (a) People with a *linear career concept* are motivated primarily by a desire for power and achievement and view careers as involving upward movement with infrequent career changes. (b) People with an *expert career concept* are motivated by a desire to have job security and develop expertise and view careers as involving a lifelong commitment, with the mastery of skills being more important than upward advancement. (c) People with a *spiral career concept* are motivated by a need for personal growth and opportunities to be creative and view careers as involving lateral movements across similar occupations that occur every five to 10 years. (d) People with a *transitory career concept* are motivated by a desire for variety and independence and view careers as involving lateral movements across different occupations that occur every two to four years. According to Driver and Brousseau, situations favorable to traditional linear and expert concepts are being replaced with situations more consistent with spiral and transitory concepts. They recommend that organizations adopt a pluralistic approach that “provides opportunities for diverse career experiences … [and allows organizations] to meet changing business conditions more effectively” (Brousseau, Driver, Eneroth, & Larsson, 1996, p. 56).