# Organizational Change and Development


“Organizational change is a process, a goal, or both … [and organizational development] is a toolbox of various methods for affecting that change” (Landy & Conte, 2016, p. 548). Models of planned change and methods of organizational development (OD) are described below: 
 
1. **Models of Planned Change:** Lewin’s (1951) *three-step model* is an early model of planned change that continues to be influential. It distinguishes between the following stages: *Unfreezing* involves identifying and reducing forces that are maintaining an undesirable status quo and identifying and increasing forces that disrupt the status quo. *Changing* involves implementing the desired changes to move the organization to a new state of equilibrium. *Refreezing* involves integrating the desired change into organizational values and traditions to stabilize the new state of equilibrium and prevent regression to the prior undesirable state. 

Cummings and Worley’s (2015) *general model of planned change* incorporates concepts from the three-step model and other models and distinguishes between four phases of change: 

(a) During the *entering and contracting phase*, the organization identifies its primary problems and the relevant members of the organization for addressing those problems and selects an OD practitioner. The OD practitioner establishes a collaborative relationship with members of the organization, gathers initial information to gain understanding of the organization’s problems, and works with organization members to reach an agreement on expectations about desired outcomes and develop a contract that specifies how the OD practitioner and members will work together.  

(b) The *diagnosing phase* consists of collecting and analyzing diagnostic information at the organization, group, and individual levels and providing feedback to the organization about its problems.  

(c) The *planning and implementing phase* includes addressing the organization’s readiness to change, creating a vision of the organization’s future, designing OD interventions and formulating an action plan for implementing them, managing the transition, and sustaining momentum by, for example, providing necessary resources and support and ensuring that employees acquire relevant competencies.  
(d) The *evaluating and institutionalizing phase* consists of evaluating the implementation and results of the OD interventions; deciding whether changes should be continued, modified, or suspended; and institutionalizing changes through feedback and corrective actions, reward allocation, and training.  

**2. Methods of Organizational Development**

(a) **Survey Feedback:** Survey feedback is often overseen by an OD consultant and consists of three phases: collect data, provide feedback, and develop an action plan. Data collection involves having employees at all levels of the organization complete surveys that are used to obtain information on their attitudes, opinions, and perceptions related to work conditions, supervision, company policies, and other important issues. The obtained information is summarized and shared with employees to help them understand the organization’s current strengths and weaknesses and identify problems that need to be addressed. Employees then offer recommendations to management for resolving these problems, and management develops an action plan, often with the help of the OD consultant. 

(b) **Process Consultation:** As its name suggests, process consultation (Schein, 1969) focuses on communication, decision-making, problem-solving, interpersonal relationships, and other organizational processes that are contributing to performance problems. The process consultant does not provide answers or solutions to problems but, instead, helps the organization become self-reliant by learning to diagnose and resolve its own problems.   

(c) **Self-Managed Work Teams:** Self-managed work teams (SMWTs) are groups of employees who have total responsibility for and control over their own work, including budgeting, task assignments, methods for completing tasks, work schedules, employee selection and training, and performance appraisal. SMWTs do not have a supervisor, and the leadership role may change over time, depending on which team member has the expertise needed for the specific situation.

(d) **Technostructural Interventions:** Technostructural interventions focus on changing an organization’s technology or structure in order to improve work methods, work content, and employee relationships and to reduce costs. These interventions include business process reengineering, job enrichment, and alternative work schedules. Business process reengineering (BPR) involves increasing organizational efficiency by radically redesigning the organization’s financial, communication, and other core processes (Hammer & Champy, 1993). Job enrichment was originally described by Herzberg (1966) and involves designing a job so it provides opportunities for responsibility, challenge, and advancement and other motivator (job content) factors that increase worker satisfaction and motivation. Alternative work schedules include the compressed workweek and flextime:
The *compressed workweek* reduces the number of work days by increasing the number of hours worked each day – for example, 10 hours a day for four days. Research has found that the compressed workweek has a strong positive effect on job satisfaction and a positive but weaker effect on job productivity, but its effects on absenteeism are unclear (Baltes et al., 1999; Bird, 2010). 

*Flextime* requires all employees to work a total number of hours each day (e.g., 8 hours) and to work during a core time (e.g., 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.) but gives them flexibility in starting and ending times. Baltes and his colleagues (1999) conducted a meta-analysis of research on the impact of flextime on objective measures of job productivity, self-rated job performance, absenteeism, job satisfaction, and satisfaction with the work schedule. The results indicated that the strongest beneficial effect of flextime was on the reduction of absenteeism and the weakest effect was on self-rated job performance. 
(e) **Total Quality Management:** Total quality management (TQM) emphasizes “continuous improvement … [through] continuous and incremental changes to all processes” (Nahavandi & Malekzadeh, 1999, p. 497). Other characteristics of TQM include top management commitment to quality, employee involvement, the use of teams, a focus on customer satisfaction, and data-driven decision-making. Specific techniques used to implement TQM include quality circles, benchmarking, and six sigma (Daft, Kendrick, & Vershinina, 2010): 

*Quality circles* (QCs) are small groups of employees who volunteer to meet regularly to identify problems related to quality, productivity, and other issues and discuss methods for resolving them. The employees then provide management with recommendations for alleviating the identified problems.
*Benchmarking* is an organizational tool that involves “a continuous process of measuring products, services and practices against major competitors or industry leaders” (Daft, Kendrick, & Vershinina, 2010, p. 751). Its purpose is to identify ways for improving organizational processes, productivity, and the quality of products and services.

*Six sigma* is an “approach to quality management … [that provides] training for employees and managers in statistical analysis, project management, and problem-solving methods to reduce the defect rate of products” (Landy & Conte, 2016, p. 545).

(f) **Appreciative Inquiry:** Appreciative inquiry combines elements of social constructionism and positive psychology and “involves identifying the unique and best aspects of the organization, followed by generating ideas about how to build on them” (Truxillo, Bauer, & Erdogan, 2016, p. 547). The process of appreciative inquiry is referred to as the “4D cycle” and consists of four phases (Ludema, Cooperrider, & Barrett, 2006): discovery (appreciate “what is”), dream (envision “what could be”), design (determine “what should be”), and delivery/destiny (sustain “what will be”).

3. **Program Logic Model:** In recent years, literature on program development, implementation, and evaluation has increasingly emphasized the roles of *program theory* (also referred to as a theory of change) and the *program logic model*. Some authors use the terms program theory and program logic model interchangeably, but others distinguish between them. As an example of the latter, McLaughlin and Jordan (2004) describe program theory as “assumptions about resources and activities and how these lead to realizing intended outcomes” and a program logic model as “a useful tool for describing program theory” (p. 11). As a “useful tool,” the primary purpose of a program logic model is to “provide stakeholders with a road map describing the sequence of related events connecting the need for the planned program with the program’s desired results” (W. K. Kellogg Foundation, 2004, p.3). 
Program logic models can be created for all types of programs (e.g., employee wellness program, management training program, substance abuse prevention program for high school students). They are constructed during the planning stage of the program by a team of people who will be involved in the program’s development, implementation, and/or evaluation. The formats of project logic models vary, but they most often take the form of a flow chart that includes several components connected by arrows that represent the causal relationship between adjacent components. The components include the following:  

*Inputs* are the human, financial, organizational, and community resources that are needed to support the program – e.g., managers, consultants, data sources, funding sources.  

*Activities* are the processes and actions that are needed to produce the program’s outputs – e.g., developing training materials, conducting training sessions, collecting data on students’ knowledge about substance abuse. 

*Outputs* are the direct, tangible results or products of program activities – e.g., predicted level of employee satisfaction with the program, number of employees who will complete training, number of students who will participate in the program.  

*Outcomes* are the short-, intermediate-, and long-term changes or benefits that are expected to be produced by the program’s activities and outputs – e.g., expected changes in the knowledge and skills of managerial candidates, changes in employees’ lifestyles, reduction in students’ risk for substance abuse 
More complex versions of a logic model include additional components. For example, the initial component might be a statement of the program’s goals or the problem being addressed by the program, and the final component might be a statement that describes the expected long-term impact of the program on the organization or community.

