# Organizational Theories

Organizational theories address the structure, procedures, and other important factors that affect organizational outcomes.
**1. Taylor’s Scientific Management:** Taylor’s (1911) scientific management proposes that, to maximize organizational efficiency and productivity, managers must: (a) use scientific methods (e.g., time-and-motion studies) to identify the best way to do a job; (b) make sure that workers are scientifically selected and trained by determining the skill requirements for each job and selecting and training workers so their skills match those requirements; (c) have an equal division of labor, with managers responsible for planning and organizing work and workers responsible for implementing the manager’s plans; and (d) cooperate with (rather than coerce) workers to ensure that all work is done in ways consistent with scientific principles. Taylor also believed that workers are motivated primarily by a desire for economic gain and advocated linking financial incentives to productivity by, for example, using a differential piece-rate system that gives efficient workers higher wages. 

**2. Weber’s Bureaucracy:** Weber (1947) described a bureaucracy as an impersonal and rational way to ensure that an organization’s operations are orderly and efficient.  As described by Weber, the essential elements of a bureaucratic organization include a division of labor, a well-defined hierarchy of authority, formal rules and procedures, employment decisions based on competence and merit, written records of decisions and actions, and separation of ownership and management.

**3. Mayo’s Human Relations Approach:** The results of Mayo’s (1933) research at the Hawthorne Plant of the Western Electric Company in the 1920s and 1930s contributed to the development of the *human relations approach* to management. His research began as an application of scientific management and involved altering illumination level and other physical work conditions to identify what conditions maximize job productivity. However, Mayo found that productivity usually increased, regardless of what changes were made. The results of subsequent interviews and observations of workers indicated that increased productivity was due to the attention workers received as research participants, and Mayo referred to this as the *Hawthorne effect*. He also found that productivity was affected by informal work group norms and that workers were sanctioned by coworkers for violating those norms. For example, workers used “binging” (punching a coworker on the upper arm) to let coworkers know when their productivity levels were too high. Based on these results, Mayo concluded that social factors were more important than physical work conditions for work motivation and productivity.   

**4. McGregor’s Theory X/Theory Y:** McGregor’s (1960) Theory X/Theory Y focuses on the interactions between supervisors and subordinates and proposes that a supervisor’s beliefs about subordinates have a self-fulfilling prophecy effect. In other words, a supervisor’s beliefs determine how the supervisor acts toward subordinates which, in turn, determines how subordinates behave. As described by McGregor, Theory X supervisors believe that subordinates are inherently lazy, dislike responsibility, resist change, and are concerned only about themselves and that supervisors must be directive and controlling to ensure that workers meet organizational goals. In contrast, Theory Y supervisors believe that subordinates enjoy work, are self-directed and internally motivated, and seek responsibility and that a supervisor’s role is to provide subordinates with conditions that allow them to fulfill their own goals by achieving organizational goals. ­­­­McGregor was influenced by the human relations approach and the work of Maslow and believed that Theory Y produces the best outcomes for employees and organizations.  

**5. Katz and Kahn’s Open-System Theory:** According to Katz and Kahn (1978), organizations are open systems that have the characteristics of other open systems – for example, they undergo cycles of events, act in ways to maintain homeostasis, avoid negative entropy (decay and destruction of the system) by acquiring new resources, and function according to the principles of equifinality and multifinality: According to the *principle of equifinality*, a system can achieve the same goal or outcome in multiple ways; according to the *principle of multifinality*, a system can achieve dissimilar goals or outcomes from the same initial conditions. Their theory also proposes that organizations, like other open systems, are characterized by input-throughput-output cycles: Organizations take in materials, information, and other resources (inputs); transform those resources to products, services, and information (throughputs); and then send out the products, services, and information (outputs). The consequences of the outputs (e.g., profits, customer feedback) are then brought back into the process as inputs.
