# Attitudes and Attitude Change

**Attitudes and Attitude Change
Attitudes and Behaviors:** Early research found a weak relationship between attitudes and behavior, but subsequent studies found that the strength of the relationship is affected by several conditions, including the strength, accessibility, and specificity of the attitudes (Sanderson, 2010): (a) Attitudes are better predictors of behaviors when a person’s attitude is strong.  Attitudinal strength is greater when the person’s attitude toward an issue was derived from direct experience and the issue is relevant to the person’s self-interests. (b) An attitude is more likely to predict behavior when the attitude toward an issue is easily accessible because the person is well-informed about the issue or has been repeatedly asked about it. (c) The link between attitudes and behaviors is stronger when they’re at the same level of specificity. Many early studies failed to find a strong link because they attempted to use general attitudes to predict specific behaviors.

The theory of planned behavior, the prototype/willingness model, and the health belief model provide frameworks for understanding the relationship between attitudes and behaviors:

1. **Theory of Planned Behavior:** According to the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005), the intention to perform a behavior is the best predictor of behavior, and a person’s behavior intention is determined by three factors: the person’s attitude toward the behavior, what the person thinks others believe he/she should do (subjective norms), and the person’s confidence in his/her ability to perform the behavior (perceived behavior control).
2. **Prototype/Willingness Model:** The prototype/willingness model (Gibbons & Gerard, 1995) has been used primarily to predict health-related risk behaviors and is based on the assumption that there are two paths to engaging in a behavior: a reasoned path and a social reaction path. The reasoned path is the result of a person’s behavior intention (as predicted by the theory of planned behavior), while the social reaction path is the result of the person’s willingness to engage in the behavior in particular circumstances. According to this theory, willingness depends on the person’s perceived acceptability of the behavior which, in turn, is determined by the person’s prototype (social image) of people who engage in the behavior. When the prototype is positive, a person is more willing to engage in the behavior in social situations that are conducive to that behavior, and vice versa.  For example, adolescents who have a positive image of peers who are marijuana users will be more willing than those with a negative image to try marijuana at a party where some of their peers are smoking marijuana.

3. **Health Belief Model:** The health belief model (Rosenstock, Strecher, & Becker, 1994) identifies beliefs, attitudes, and other factors that predict the likelihood that a person will engage in behavior that will reduce the risk for developing a disorder. There are several versions of this model, and the most recent versions include the following factors: (a) Perceived susceptibility refers to a person’s perceptions about his/her likelihood of developing the disorder. (b) Perceived severity refers to the person’s perceptions about the seriousness of the consequences of developing the disorder. (c) Perceived benefits are the person’s beliefs about the likelihood that taking action will reduce his/her vulnerability to the disorder. (d) Perceived barriers are the person’s beliefs about the material and psychological costs of taking action. (e) Self-efficacy is the person’s confidence that he or she has the ability to take action. (f) Cues to action are factors that motivate the person to act (e.g., illness of a family member, advice from health providers, mass media campaigns). An implication of the health belief model is that a person’s willingness to engage in health-related behavior can be increased by targeting these factors.
**Theories of Attitude Change:** The elaboration likelihood model, social judgment theory, balance theory, cognitive dissonance theory, and self-perception theory provide alternative explanations for attitude change.

1. **Elaboration Likelihood Model:** According to the elaboration likelihood model (Petty & Cacioppo, 1981), a persuasive message can be processed through a central or peripheral route. The *central route* is characterized by a high level of elaborative processing that involves thoughtful and careful evaluation of the message. It is most likely to be used when the person perceives the message to be personally relevant, has the cognitive ability to process the message, and/or is in a neutral or bad mood. Attitude change induced via the central route depends on the strength of the argument presented in the message and is likely to be strong, enduring, and predictive of behavior. In contrast, the *peripheral route* is characterized by a low level of elaboration and involves an automatic evaluation of the message. It is most likely to be used when the person perceives the message to be unimportant, does not have the cognitive ability to process the message, and/or is in a good mood. Attitude change induced via the peripheral route depends on peripheral cues, which are source, message, and recipient factors that are not central to the content of the message – e.g., the communicator’s attractiveness, likability, credibility, or celebrity; the length of the message; and the recipient’s reliance on heuristics. When the peripheral route produces attitude change, the change is likely to be weak and temporary and not predictive of behavior.

2. **Social Judgment Theory:** Social judgment theory (Sherif & Hovland, 1961) is based on the assumption that the effectiveness of a persuasive message depends on a person’s current position on an issue, and it distinguishes between three “latitudes” that represent different degrees of similarity between the person’s position and the position advocated by the message: The *latitude of acceptance* consists of positions the person finds acceptable because they’re similar to his/her own position. The *latitude of rejection* consists of positions the person finds unacceptable because they’re extremely different from his/her position. And the *latitude of noncommitment* consists of positions the person will not automatically accept or reject but will consider because they’re moderately different from his/her position. This theory also assumes that the size of the latitudes is affected by the person’s ego-involvement with the issue addressed by the message: As the person’s level of ego-involvement increases, the latitudes of acceptance and noncommitment become smaller and the latitude of rejection becomes larger.

3. **Balance Theory:** Heider’s (1958) balance theory is also known as P-O-X theory because it focuses on the relationships among three elements: the person (P), another person (O), and an attitude object or event (X). According to Heider, the relationships among these entities can be balanced (consistent) or unbalanced (inconsistent); and, because unbalanced states cause a sense of discomfort, people are motivated to establish balance. For example, a balanced state exists when Patricia (P) likes Olivia (O) and country music (X), and Olivia (O) also likes country music (X). In this situation, Patricia will not be motivated to change her attitude toward Olivia or country music.  However, an unbalanced state exists when Patricia (P) likes Oscar (O) and country music (X), but Oscar (O) hates country music (X). In this situation, Patricia (P) will be motivated to establish a balanced state by changing her attitude toward Oscar (O) or toward country music (X).

4. **Cognitive Dissonance Theory**:  Festinger’s (1954) cognitive dissonance theory proposes that, when people become aware of an inconsistency between two of their cognitions (attitudes, opinions, beliefs) or between a cognition and a behavior, they experience a state of mental discomfort (“cognitive dissonance”) that they’re motivated to relieve. To do so, people typically use one of the following ways to relieve dissonance: replace or subtract a dissonant cognition, add a consonant cognition, increase the importance of a consonant cognition, or decrease the importance of a dissonant cognition (e.g., O’Keefe, 2002).

In an initial study of cognitive dissonance, Festinger and Carlsmith (1959) had research subjects participate in a very boring task and then paid some subjects $1.00 and other subjects $20.00 to convince potential subjects (actually confederates) to participate in the task by telling them the task was interesting and enjoyable. As predicted, when the original subjects were subsequently asked to rate the task, those paid $1.00 rated it as more enjoyable than did those paid $20.00. According to Festinger and Carlsmith, this occurred because subjects paid $1.00 had insufficient justification for lying to potential subjects and, therefore, experienced cognitive dissonance. Consequently, to reduce their dissonance, these subjects replaced a dissonant cognition (the task was boring) with a consonant one (the task was enjoyable). In contrast, subjects paid $20.00 did not experience dissonance because they had justification for lying and, as a result, did not change their negative attitudes toward the task. 

5. **Self-Perception Theory:** Self-perception theory (Bem, 1972) proposes that people learn about themselves in the same way they learn about other people – i.e., by observing their behaviors and the circumstances in which those behaviors occur. Evidence for self-perception theory is provided by research on the *overjustification effect* which predicts that, when people are externally reinforced for engaging in an intrinsically rewarding behavior, their intrinsic motivation decreases. In one study (Lepper, Greene, & Nisbett, 1973), children who enjoyed coloring with felt-tip markers were either rewarded or not rewarded for using the markers during a free play period. As predicted, in a subsequent play period when rewards were no longer given to the previously rewarded children, these children spent less time coloring with the markers than unrewarded children did, apparently because the external reward reduced their intrinsic motivation. 
