# Persuasion

**Persuasion
Persuasion:** Researchers have identified a number of communicator, message, and recipient factors that affect the likelihood that a message will persuade recipients to change their attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors. Some of these factors are addressed by alpha or omega strategies for increasing the effectiveness of a persuasive message (Knowles & Linn, 2004): *Alpha strategies* attempt to overcome resistance to persuasion by increasing approach forces. These strategies involve providing reasons why change is desirable by, for example, maximizing the strength of the arguments presented in the message and using consensus information (showing that the attitude, belief, or behavior advocated by the message is the most popular one). In contrast, *omega strategies* attempt to reduce or neutralize resistance by decreasing avoidance forces. These include addressing resistance by providing recipients with counterarguments to their concerns and using comparisons to make the position advocated by the persuasive message seem more desirable. Other factors that affect the impact of a persuasive message include the following:

1. **Communicator (Source) Factors:** Communicators are more persuasive when they are attractive, likable, and credible. With regard to credibility, the research has found that it is most affected by the communicator’s expertise and trustworthiness (Hovland, Janis, & Kelley, 1953): Communicators have expertise when they are perceived as having adequate knowledge, skill, and experience. For example, celebrities are most persuasive in advertisements when there is congruence between the celebrity’s background and the product they are pitching: A well-known basketball player is likely to be a more effective spokesman for athletic shoes than for non-athletic products. Communicators are considered trustworthy when they are perceived as being fair, honest, and unbiased. Trustworthiness can be affected by the communicator’s intent, with communicators being more likely to be considered trustworthy, for example, when they are arguing against their own best interests or when the message is accidentally overheard. Note that, while high-credible communicators are most effective, the different impact of high- and low-credible communicators on attitude change does not persist because, over time, people tend to remember the message but forget its source. This is referred to as the *sleeper effect* (Hovland & Weiss, 1951).

2. **Message Factors:** Message discrepancy, presentation order and timing, and fear arousal are three message factors that affect the persuasiveness of a message. In general, the relationship between amount of attitude change and message discrepancy has an inverted-U shape, with the greatest amount of change being elicited when there’s a moderate discrepancy between the recipient’s current position and the position advocated by the message. However, when communicator credibility is considered, the relationship maintains an inverted-U shape for low-credible communicators, but there’s a linear relationship for high-credible communicators, with amount of attitude change increasing as the degree of discrepancy increases (Aronson, Turner, & Carlsmith. 1963).

When both sides of an argument are presented, a *primacy effect* occurs when the two sides are presented back-to-back and a period of time passes before recipients’ attitudes are assessed. In other words, the side presented first has the greatest effect on attitudes. In contrast, a *recency effect* occurs when a period of time passes between presentation of the two sides and the recipients’ attitudes are assessed soon after the second presentation. In this situation, the side presented second has the greatest impact. Other situations (e.g., when the two sides are presented back-to-back and attitudes are measured immediately after the second presentation) are not associated with consistent primacy or recency effects (Miller & Campbell, 1959).

Research on the effects of fear arousal has produced inconsistent results, with some studies finding moderate fear arousal being most effective for producing changes in attitudes and behaviors and others finding low or high fear arousal most effective. However, a meta-analysis of the research (Tannenbaum et al., 2015) found that the effect of fear arousal depends on certain conditions and that appeals to fear are most effective when they (a) attempt to arouse a relatively high level of fear, (b) include an efficacy message that assures recipients that they’re capable of taking the recommended action and/or that performing the recommended action will have desirable outcomes, and (c) describe the negative consequences and the risk for those consequences if action is not taken. 

3. **Recipient Factors:** Recipient factors that have been linked to susceptibility to persuasion include self-esteem, intelligence, and age. In their meta-analysis of the research, Rhodes and Wood (1992) found an inverted U-shaped relationship between self-esteem and influenceability – i.e., recipients with moderate self-esteem were most susceptible to influence. In contrast, these investigators found a linear relationship between intelligence and influenceability, with higher levels of susceptibility being associated with lower levels of intelligence. Studies investigating the impact of age have not produced consistent results, but there’s some support for a U-shaped relationship for adolescents and adults, with adolescents/young adults and older adults being more easily persuaded than middle-aged adults (e.g., Visser & Krosnick, 1998).

The research has also identified strategies that affect people’s resistance to persuasion. For example, McGuire’s (1973) *attitude inoculation hypothesis* is based on the medical model of immunization and proposes that an effective way to increase resistance to persuasion is to “immunize” people against attempts to change their attitudes. This involves providing them with weak arguments against their current attitudes along with counterarguments that refute those arguments before they’re exposed to the persuasive message.

**Behavioral Economics:** Behavioral economics is “an approach to understanding decision making and behavior that integrates behavioral science with economic principles” (Reed, Niileksela, & Kaplan, 2013, p. 35). Topics addressed by researchers interested in behavioral economics include materialism, scarcity, and loss aversion. 

1. **Materialism:** Materialism “comprises a set of values and goals focused on wealth, possessions, image, and status … [which stand] in relative conflict with aims concerning the well-being of others, as well as one’s own personal and spiritual growth” (Kasser, 2016, p. 489). Numerous studies have confirmed that there’s a negative relationship between materialism and various aspects of personal well-being. For example, a meta-analysis of the research by Dittmar, Bond, Hurst, and Kasser (2014) found that prioritization of materialistic values and goals strongly correlated with, in order of strength, compulsive buying behavior, engaging in risky health behaviors, negative self-appraisal, and negative affect. The studies have also found that the strength of the relationship between materialism and personal well-being is greater when materialism is measured with a multidimensional scale than when it’s measured with a scale that focuses only on a desire for money and possessions. An example of the former is the Material Values Scale (Richins & Dawson, 1992) which assesses the centrality of acquiring material goods to a person’s life and the person’s beliefs about the effects of acquisition on happiness and success. [Note that the terms “materialism” and “consumerism” are often used interchangeably but that some authors distinguish between them. Denniss (2018), for example, describes materialism as the love of owning things and consumerism as the love of buying things.] 

2. **Scarcity:** Mullainathan and Shafir (2014) argue that the scarcity of something required to fulfill a need causes preoccupation with the unfulfilled need and a reduction in “mental bandwidth” that limits “our ability to pay attention, make good decisions, stick with our plans, and resist temptation” (p. 60). According to these investigators, mental bandwidth is made up of two related components: Cognitive capacity consists of mechanisms required to solve problems, engage in logical reasoning, and retain information and is assessed with measures of fluid reasoning. Executive control consists of mechanisms that are necessary for planning, shifting attention, and initiating and inhibiting certain actions. Mullainathan and Shafir also propose that periods of scarcity can produce a “scarcity trap,” which is characterized not only by preoccupation with an unfilled need but also with self-defeating behaviors that perpetuate scarcity. For example, a person with limited financial resources may postpone getting a broken car taillight fixed but then gets a ticket for the broken taillight, which results in an additional expense.  

3. **Loss Aversion:** Kahneman and Tversky’s concept of loss aversion is based on the premise that “losses loom larger than gains” (1979, p. 279). In other words, the displeasure that people experience when they lose something is greater than the pleasure they experience when they gain the same thing. According to these investigators, the aggravation caused by losing a specific amount of money is about twice as powerful as the satisfaction caused by gaining the same amount of money. For example, they found that people are likely to reject a bet involving the flip of a coin when they’ll lose $100 if the coin flip produces tails but gain $100 if the coin flip produces heads. In contrast, people are more likely to accept the bet when they’ll lose $100 if the coin flip produces tails but gain $200 if the coin flip produces heads. Loss aversion is a component of Kahneman and Tversy’s prospect theory, which addresses how risky decisions are made. 
