# Prosocial Behavior and Prejudice/Discrimination


**Prosocial Behavior:** Prosocial behaviors are intended to help others and include helping and cooperation. 

1. **Helping – Bystander Apathy vs. Intervention:** In 1964, Kitty Genovese was sexually assaulted and stabbed to death outside her New York City apartment and, despite her screams and cries for help during the attack, none of the 38 people who witnessed the crime called the police. Latane and Darley (1970) subsequently conducted a series of studies to determine what factors affect a bystander’s willingness to intervene in emergency situations. They found that the process of deciding what to do in an emergency involves five steps and that, during each step, there are obstacles to providing help:
*Step 1 – Noticing the Event:* A bystander has to notice that something unusual is happening which may not occur because the bystander is preoccupied with his or her own thoughts or because of *stimulus overload*. Stimulus overload can occur in big cities and other noisy environments and causes a person to restrict his or her attention to stimuli that seem personally relevant (Milgram, 1970).

*Step 2 – Interpreting the Event:* A bystander must interpret the situation as an emergency. A bystander may fail to do so because of the ambiguity of the situation or because of *pluralistic ignorance*, which is a misperception of how others are thinking or feeling: A bystander is exhibiting pluralistic ignorance when she doesn’t take action because she concludes that the inactivity of other bystanders is due to the fact that they know the situation does not constitute an emergency.

*Step 3 – Assuming Responsibility*: Even when a bystander recognizes there’s an emergency, he or she may decide not to provide assistance when other bystanders are present because of *diffusion of responsibility*. Diffusion of responsibility refers to a reduced sense of personal responsibility due to the belief that others are willing and able to provide assistance, and it increases as the number of bystanders increases. (With regard to number of bystanders, the studies have found that a victim is most likely to get help when there is only one bystander.)

*Step 4 – Determining How to Help:* When a bystander recognizes that a victim needs assistance, he or she has to determine how to do so. If the bystander is unable to determine how to help the victim or doesn’t feel competent to do so, the bystander may decide not to provide assistance.
*Step 5 – Deciding Whether or Not to Help:* Even when a bystander feels competent to provide help, he or she may decide not to do so because of *evaluation apprehension*, which is also known as audience inhibition and refers to concerns about being judged negatively by others.

Numerous studies have confirmed that bystander apathy is more likely to occur in urban areas than in rural areas. This finding has led some investigators to question whether it is a bystander’s current location or location of socialization that contributes to a bystander’s willingness to help a person in distress. In other words, is where the bystander is currently located that matters most or is it where the bystander was born and raised? The research suggests that current location is most important: A bystander is less likely to help a person in distress when the incident occurs in an urban area than when it occurs in a rural area, regardless of where the bystander was born and raised (Steblay, 1987).

2. **Helping – Altruism vs. Egoism**: Altruism and egoism have been identified as alternative sources of motivation for helping others. According to the *empathy-altruism hypothesis* (Batson, 1991), empathic concern provides the altruistic motive for helping – i.e., people help another person because they’re concerned about the person’s well-being. In contrast, the *negative state relief model* (Cialdini, Darby & Vincent, 1973) focuses on the role of egoism and proposes that people help others to reduce their own distress. According to this model, people may feel empathy for a person-in-need, but their empathy produces sadness or guilt, which they attempt to alleviate by providing help. Of these two explanations, the empathy-altruism hypothesis has received the most empirical support. There’s also evidence that providing assistance for altruistic reasons rather than egoistic reasons is more likely to lead to sustained helping (Piferi, Jobe, & Jones, 2006).

3. **Cooperation – Superordinate Goals**: Sherif’s (1966) Robbers Cave study demonstrated the effectiveness of using cooperation to overcome intergroup conflict. In that study, 11-year-old white, middle-class boys attending summer camp were divided into two groups. Group activities were first structured to maximize cohesiveness within groups and then to maximize competitiveness between groups. As a result, group members became very hostile and antagonistic toward members of the other group. The experimenters used several strategies to reduce intergroup conflict, and they found that the most effective strategy was the introduction of *superordinate goals* that could be accomplished only when members of the groups worked together cooperatively.
Aronson and colleagues (1978) subsequently developed the *jigsaw classroom* to evaluate the effects of superordinate goals on prejudice and discrimination in ethnically diverse elementary school classrooms. Students in these classrooms were divided into small multiethnic groups that were assigned a project that required each group member to learn about a different aspect of the project and then explain that aspect to other members of the group. In other words, members of each group had to work together to successfully complete the group project. Comparisons of outcomes for students in jigsaw and traditional classrooms found that the jigsaw classroom had a number of beneficial effects: It not only reduced prejudice and discrimination toward students belonging to ethnic minority groups but also had positive effects on the self-esteem and empathy of all students, and it improved the academic performance of ethnic minority students without hindering the performance of ethnic majority students.

**Prejudice/Discrimination - Explanations:** Explanations for prejudice and discrimination include realistic conflict theory, social identity theory, scapegoat theory, authoritarian personality theory, terror management theory, and dehumanization. 

1. **Realistic Conflict Theory:** According to realistic conflict theory (Pettigrew, 1978), prejudice and discrimination are the result of direct competition between different groups for scarce and valued resources. Evidence for this theory is provided by a number of studies including Sherif’s (1966) Robbers Cave study in which conflict between groups was generated by having two groups of boys who had strong attachments to members of their own group compete for desired prizes. The conflict caused by competition increased in intensity over time: It initially involved only name calling but eventually included stealing from members of the other group and other hostile physical acts.

2. **Social Identity Theory:** Tajfel and Turner’s (1986) social identity theory is based on the assumptions that people have a natural tendency to categorize people into groups, to identify with one or more groups, and to favor in-groups. Feeling positively toward an in-group increases a group member’s self-esteem, but it can also lead to prejudice and discrimination against members of out-groups. Research by Tajfel and colleagues (1971) found that in-group favoritism developed even in “minimal group” conditions – i.e., when group membership was temporary and based on relatively unimportant similarities.
3. **Scapegoat Theory:** According to scapegoat theory, “prejudice occurs because members of dominant groups use discrimination against weak target groups to vent their frustration and disappointment” (Breckler, Olson, & Wiggins, 2006, p. 359).  Scapegoat theory has been used to explain why frustrating socioeconomic conditions (e.g., high rates of unemployment and inflation) can cause members of the majority group to discriminate against members of minority groups.

4. **Authoritarian Personality Theory:** Adorno and his colleagues (1950) attributed extreme forms of prejudice and discrimination to an authoritarian personality, which they described as being the result of a harsh, restrictive upbringing and involving nine personality traits: conventionalism, authoritarian submission, authoritarian aggression, anti-intraception, superstition and stereotypy, power and toughness, destructiveness and cynicism, projectivity, and puritanical sexual attitudes. These investigators developed the F (Fascism) Scale to assess authoritarianism and found that scores on the scale had high correlations with scores on measures of ethnocentrism and prejudice.

5. **Terror Management Theory:** Terror management theory (TMT; Greenberg, Pyszczynski, & Solomon, 1986) has been applied to a number of phenomena including mental health, personality, altruism, aggression, and prejudice and discrimination. TMT is based on two assumptions: The first assumption is that, like other animals, humans have a biological drive to stay alive. The second assumption is that, unlike other animals, humans have cognitive abilities that allow them to be aware of their own existence and of threats to existence that thwart the drive to stay alive. TMT also contends that awareness of mortality creates a sense of terror and that cultural worldview and self-esteem act as defenses against this terror. In other words, people manage terror due to awareness of mortality (a) by maintaining faith in a cultural worldview “that imbues reality with order, meaning, and permanence and provides paths to literal and/or symbolic immortality for those who meet prescribed standards of value” (Greenberg & Kosloff, 2008, p. 1883) and (b) by adhering to standards that are consistent with their worldview to maintain their self-esteem.  

A number of studies have investigated TMT’s impact on prejudice and discrimination. For example, some studies have established that amplifying mortality salience (awareness of the inevitability of death) increases negative evaluations of and reactions to out-group members and increases positive evaluations of and reactions to in-group members (e.g., Greenberg et al., 1990). In addition, Schimel et al. (1999) found that amplifying mortality salience increases stereotypic thinking and preference for people who conform to stereotypes. They propose that these effects occur because, “[b]y seeing others as instances of social stereotypes and preferring others who confirm stereotypes over those who disconfirm them, individuals reify their conception of social reality [i.e., their cultural worldview] and thus increase its effectiveness as a shield against deeply rooted fears” (p. 922). [Methods for increasing mortality salience include asking subjects to imagine their own deaths or complete a death anxiety scale, interviewing subjects outside a funeral home or near a cemetery, and exposing subjects to subliminal death-related words (e.g., dead, coffin) during a computer-administered word-relation test.]

6. **Dehumanization:** Dehumanization is an “evaluative stance (merely cognitive or also behavioral) toward other humans that involves drawing a line between individuals or groups (as in-group/out-group) according to an assumed concept of what it means to be human” (Kronfeldner, 2016, p. 626). Dehumanization is used to explain prejudice and discrimination and can be blatant or subtle. Most early theories focused on blatant dehumanization which denies the humanness of outgroup members and can elicit extreme aggression and violence toward them. In contrast, more recent theories focus on subtle dehumanization which views outgroup members as less than human rather than non-human. An example of the latter is *infrahumanization theory*: As described by Leyens and his colleagues (2001, 2007), infrahumanization “is a process by which people consider their ingroup as fully human and outgroups as less human and more animal-like” and occurs even in the absence of intergroup antagonism or differences in status (2007, p. 140). These investigators distinguish between primary and secondary emotions, with primary emotions (e.g., anger, surprise, fear) being non-uniquely human and secondary emotions (e.g., pride, hope, shame, resentment, disappointment) being uniquely human. They also propose that people tend to humanize members of their ingroups by attributing more positive and negative secondary emotions to them which, in turn, elicits empathy and prosocial behaviors toward those individuals. In contrast, people tend to attribute fewer positive and negative secondary emotions to members of outgroups which elicits less empathy toward and acceptance of them.

**Prejudice/Discrimination – Interventions:** Many interventions for reducing prejudice and discrimination are based on Allport’s (1954) *contact hypothesis*. It proposes that contact between members of majority and minority groups is most effective for reducing prejudice and discrimination when (a) members of the groups have equal status; (b) members must work together to achieve common (superordinate) goals; (c) there is no competition between members; and (d) the contact is sanctioned by law, custom, or institutional authorities.

**Covert Racism:** Ridley (1995) distinguishes between overt and covert racism and intentional and unintentional racism: *Overt racism* is also known as old-fashioned racism and is characterized by openly hostile and aggressive attitudes toward and blatant acts of discrimination against members of racial minority groups. *Covert racism* is also known as modern racism and subtle racism and is indirect, ambiguous, and often difficult to recognize; however, like overt racism, it has negative consequences for members of racial minority groups. According to Ridley, overt racism is always intentional, but covert racism can be intentional or unintentional: People exhibit *intentional covert racism* when they’re aware of their racist attitudes and behaviors and try to conceal their true intent by giving socially acceptable explanations for them. People exhibit *unintentional covert racism* when they do not deliberately engage in harmful acts and are unaware of the negative consequences of their prejudiced attitudes and discriminatory behaviors. Although overt forms of racism have diminished in the past few decades, covert forms persist. Theories of covert racism include the following: 

(a) *Symbolic racism* (Sears, 1988) is characterized by a belief in egalitarianism coupled with the beliefs that prejudice and discrimination no longer exist, that members of certain minority groups violate traditional White American values such as the Protestant work ethic, individualism, and self-determination, and that the social and economic hardships of these groups are due to a lack of effort and other internal factors. A person exhibiting symbolic racism justifies his/her opposition to affirmative action and other policies and programs designed to promote equality on the grounds that they’re unfair. 

(b) Like symbolic racism, *aversive racism* (Dovidio & Gaertner, 2004) is characterized by a belief in egalitarianism. However, it’s accompanied by a non-prejudiced self-image and negative, often unconscious feelings about minority group members that were acquired early in life. People exhibiting this type of racism avoid interacting with minority group members when possible and act in discriminatory ways only when doing so can be justified on a basis other than race. 

(c) *Ambivalent racism* (Katz & Haas, 1988) is characterized by a combination of positive and negative attitudes toward minority group members. These conflicting attitudes lead to emotional tension, which a person attempts to reduce by amplifying his/her positive or negative attitudes: In other words, ambivalent individuals respond in more extreme ways to situations involving a minority group member than they do to similar situations involving a majority group member, and their response can be either positive or negative depending on the nature of the situation. For example, when rating minority group members and majority group members who have engaged in undesirable behaviors, ambivalent individuals will give more negative ratings to minority group members than to majority group members.

**Levels of Racism:** The APA (2021) distinguishes between four levels of racism:  

(a) *Structural racism* refers to “laws, policies, and practices that produce cumulative, durable, and race-based inequalities, and includes the failure to correct previous laws and practices that were explicitly racist” (p. 2). Funding schools through local property taxes is an example of structural racism because doing so “is tied to the historical practices of redlining and over-valuing white residential property and neighborhoods” (Yearby, Lewis, Gilbert, & Banks, 2020, p. 5). 

(b) *Institutional racism* is the result of “policies, practices, and procedures of institutions – such as school, health care, law enforcement, and criminal justice systems – that marginalize diverse racial groups” (p. 2). Zero tolerance policies in schools that cause a disproportionate number of racial/ethnic minority students to be suspended or expelled is an example of institutional racism. 

(c) *Interpersonal racism* “occurs when individuals from socially and politically dominant racial groups behave in ways that diminish and harm people who belong to other racial groups” (pp. 2-3). Microaggressions are a type of interpersonal racism. They involve “brief and commonplace daily verbal, behavioral, or environmental indignities, whether intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile, derogatory, or negative racial slights and insults toward people of color” (Sue et al., 2007, p. 271).

(d) *Internalized (intrapersonal) racism* refers to “the acceptance by diverse racial populations of the negative societal beliefs and stereotypes about themselves … that reinforce the superiority of Whites and can lead to the perception of themselves as devalued, worthless, and powerless” (p. 3). Colorism, which is the acceptance of negative stereotypes and beliefs about skin color by members of racial/ethnic minority groups, is an example of internalized racism. 

Note that different authors define the term *systemic racism* differently: Some consider systemic racism to be synonymous with structural racism, others consider it to be synonymous with institutional racism, and others describe it as encompassing all levels of racism (e.g., Banaji, Fiske, & Massey, 2021).
**Sexism:** Sexism “refers to negative attitudes toward individuals based solely on their sex, combined with institutional and cultural practices that support the unequal status of different sex categories” (Bosson, Vandello, & Buckner, 2019, p. 195). Men can be the targets of sexism, but women are the most common targets because of their nondominant position in society. Consequently, most of the literature focuses on the impact of sexism on women. According to *ambivalent sexism theory* (Glick & Fiske, 1996, 2001), sexism includes two distinct but co-existing and complementary components: Hostile sexism involves “antipathy toward women who are viewed as usurping men’s power,” while *benevolent sexism* involves “a subjectively favorable, chivalrous ideology that offers protection and affection to women who embrace conventional roles” (2001, p. 109). Hostile and benevolent sexism both reflect the idea that women are inferior to men and thereby justify and maintain gender inequality. Research by Glick and Fiske confirmed that men exhibiting ambivalent sexism often reconcile their competing views of women by distinguishing between two types of women: They direct hostile sexism toward feminists, career women, and other women whom they view as violating traditional gender roles and direct benevolent sexism toward women whom they believe are adhering to traditional gender roles.

**Stereotypes:**  Stereotypes are “rigid and inaccurate preconceived notions that … [one has] about all people who are members of a particular group, whether it be defined along racial, religious, sexual, or other lines” (Sue, 2003, p. 25). Because stereotypes can lead to rigid expectations about members of the stereotyped group, they can result in prejudice and discrimination.  

**1. Self-stereotyping:** Self-stereotyping refers to a person’s unconscious internalization of positive and negative stereotypes that are applied to his/her own group by other groups. The research has found that self-stereotyping can have negative or positive effects, even when the stereotypes are negative. For instance, there’s evidence that endorsing negative stereotypes of one’s own group can help protect a person’s self-esteem by serving as an explanation for his or her behavior or outcomes. Several studies have found that women are more likely to adopt the stereotype that “women are bad at math” when they anticipate or experience failure on a math exam (e.g., Burkley, Andrade, Stermer, & Bell, 2013).

**2. Stereotype Threat:** Stereotype threat “occurs when situational factors activate group stereotypes in members of low status groups, inducing assimilation to the stereotypes or self-stereotyping” (Hummert, 2011, p. 256). Studies have confirmed that stereotype threat impairs the performance of members of stigmatized groups when they’re performing tasks that are pertinent to a negative stereotype about their groups. For example, Hess and his colleagues (2003) found that the performance of older adults (but not younger adults) on a memory task decreased from baseline after they read a news article that confirmed the stereotype of age-related memory decline but did not decrease after reading a news article that refuted the stereotype. One explanation for the impact of stereotype threat on task performance is that it increases physiological arousal and stress and negative self-statements, thereby reducing the cognitive resources needed to accomplish the task.

**Shooter Bias:** Much of the research on shooter bias has used a videogame simulation designed to recreate the experience of a police officer who suddenly encounters a potentially dangerous suspect (Correll, Park, Judd, & Wittenbrink, 2002). In these studies, subjects are first told to shoot the suspect in the videogame whenever he is holding a gun but to refrain from shooting when there is no gun. Then, during the simulation, subjects view a series of computer images of a young Black or White male suspect who is holding a cellphone, wallet, or gun and must quickly assess the situation and decide whether or not to shoot. Shooter bias is measured with response time and accuracy: It occurs when subjects (a) decide to shoot armed Black suspects more quickly than armed White suspects but, conversely, decide to refrain from shooting unarmed White suspects more quickly than unarmed Black suspects; and (b) erroneously decide to shoot unarmed Black suspects more than frequently than unarmed White suspects and, conversely, erroneously decide not to shoot armed White suspects more frequently than armed Black suspects.   
 
Correll et al.’s (2002) initial studies provided evidence of shooter bias among civilians (college students and community members), with White and Black subjects demonstrating similar levels of shooter bias in terms of both response time and accuracy. In a subsequent study, Correll et al. (2007) compared police officers with civilians (DMV workers) and found that police officers were better able to detect the presence of a weapon and did not exhibit shooter bias in terms of accuracy. However, like civilians, the police officers showed “robust racial bias in the speed with which they made shoot/don’t shoot decisions” (p. 1020): Police officers decided to shoot armed Black suspects more quickly than armed White suspects and not to shoot unarmed White suspects more quickly than unarmed Black suspects. Based on participants’ responses to a questionnaire that measured racial prejudice and stereotypes of Black men, Correll et al. (2002) concluded that participants’ familiarity with cultural stereotypes of Black men as being dangerous, violent, and aggressive was a better predictor of shooter bias than was either personal endorsement of racial stereotypes or personal prejudice.