# Social Influence – Group Influences

Researchers interested in group influences on behavior have investigated group effects on individual behavior, minority influence, types of group tasks, and stages of group development.

1. **Group Effects on Individual Behavior:** Social facilitation, social inhibition, social loafing, and deindividuation are four effects that the presence of other people can have on an individual’s behavior.

(a) Social facilitation and social inhibition occur when the mere presence of other people affects a person’s task performance. *Social facilitation* is an improvement in performance and affects easy and well-learned tasks, while *social inhibition* is a decrease in performance and affects difficult and unfamiliar tasks. According to Zajonc’s (1980) drive theory, social facilitation and inhibition occur because the presence of others increases physiological arousal. Increased arousal then strengthens the dominant response, which is usually the correct response for an easy task and an incorrect response for a difficult task.

(b) *Social loafing* is also known as the free rider effect and occurs when members of a group contribute less to the group’s output than they would have done if working alone. For example, in one study, subjects were asked to make as much noise as possible by yelling and clapping, and the results indicated that subjects were louder when making noise alone than when making noise in a group (Latane, Williams, & Harkins, 1979). Explanations for social loafing include diffusion of responsibility and decreased evaluation apprehension: Diffusion of responsibility occurs when people who are working with others on a collective task feel less motivated to exert effort and less responsible for task outcomes. A decrease in evaluation apprehension occurs because, when people are working on a collective task, they’re less concerned that their contribution to the task will be identified and judged by others. Social loafing is less likely to occur when a group is small and cohesive and when group members believe that the task is personally meaningful, they’ll be punished for poor performance, their individual contributions are necessary for a successful outcome, and their individual contributions can be identified and evaluated (Karau & Williams, 1993). There’s also evidence that people from individualist-Western cultures are more likely than those from collectivist-Eastern cultures to engage in social loafing (Simms & Nichols, 2014).

(c) *Deindividuation* refers to “the loss of a person’s sense of individuality and the reduction of normal constraints against deviant behavior” (Kassin, Fein, & Markus, 2016, p. 321). It occurs when people can act anonymously because they’re in a large crowd or their identities are disguised. For example, Mann (1981) found that, when crowds gathered when someone was threatening to jump off a bridge or building, the crowd was more likely to taunt and urge the person to jump when it was night and the crowd was large than when it was day and the crowd was small.  

2. **Minority Influence:** Researchers interested in minority influence have investigated factors that increase the likelihood that an individual group member with a minority opinion will persuade the majority of group members who share an opposing opinion.  According to Moscovici (1980), individuals with a minority opinion influence others in a different way than individuals with the majority opinion. While the majority has informational or normative influence, a minority must rely on behavioral style and is most likely to persuade the majority when the minority consistently expresses his or her opinion without seeming to be too rigid or dogmatic. Moscovici also proposed that opinion change due to minority influence is more likely to lead to private acceptance of the opinion (conversion), while opinion change due to majority influence is more likely to lead to public acceptance (compliance).  

3. **Task Performance:** Steiner (1972) proposed that the outcomes associated with group performance are affected by the type of task, and he distinguished between five task types:

(a) When working on an *additive task*, it’s not necessary for group members to work together, and the final output is the sum of the contributions of each group member. For this type of task, group performance is better than the best group member’s performance.
(b) Group members also work independently on a *compensatory task*, and the group’s output is the average of each member’s estimate, judgment, or other input. On this type of task, group performance is usually better than the performance of any individual member.
(c) A *disjunctive task* requires group members to choose the best solution, decision, or judgment from those provided by each group member, which is ordinarily the one provided by the most competent member. A group’s performance on a disjunctive task is equal to or less than the performance of the best group member.
(d) When working on a *conjunctive task*, all group members must contribute to the task, and the performance of the entire group (e.g., the group’s ability to meet a deadline or a team’s time to finish a relay race) is limited by the contribution of the least capable member.
(e) On a *discretionary task*, group members decide how to combine the contribution of each member, and the group’s performance depends on how the contributions are combined.

4. **Group Development:** Tuckman and Jensen’s (1977) model of group development distinguishes between five stages: During the initial *forming stage*, group members are uncertain about their roles and responsibilities, rely on the leader to guide them, and act politely toward each other to avoid conflict. Once members feel they’re part of the group, they transition to the *storming stage*. This stage is characterized by power struggles, conflicts over procedures, and a lack of trust. Next is the *norming stage*, which is characterized by the growth of group cohesion and commitment, attempts to resolve conflicts and other issues that arose during the storming stage, and the establishment of rules, procedures, and group norms. This stage is followed by the *performing stage*, during which the emphasis is on working efficiently and cooperatively to achieve group goals. Finally, during the *adjourning stage*, the focus is on completing tasks, recognizing individual and group accomplishments, and either disbanding the group or continuing the group with new goals.
