# Social Cognition – Causal Attributions


*Causal attributions* are inferences that people draw about the causes of their own behaviors and the behaviors of others. Attributions can be internal (dispositional) or external (situational), stable or unstable, and specific or global. For example, people with an optimistic explanatory style attribute the negative outcomes of their actions to external, unstable, and specific factors, while those with a pessimistic explanatory style attribute them to internal, stable, and global factors (e.g., Peterson & Seligman, 1984). Researchers have identified several biases that affect causal attributions:

(a) The *fundamental attribution error* (Ross, 1977) is the tendency to overestimate the role of dispositional factors and underestimate the role of situational factors when making attributions about the behavior of another person. There’s evidence that the fundamental attribution error is affected by culture. For example, Miller (1984) asked North Americans and Asian Indians about the causes of negative events they had observed and found that, among children, there were no significant differences in terms of situational and dispositional attributions. However, among adolescents and adults, North Americans made more dispositional attributions and Asian Indians made more situational attributions.

(b) The *actor-observer effect* (Jones & Nisbett, 1971) addresses the attributions we make about ourselves and other people, and it is the tendency to attribute our own behaviors to situational factors and the behaviors of others to dispositional factors.

(c) The *self-serving* bias (Ross & Sicoly, 1979) applies to attributions we make about ourselves. It occurs when we attribute our own behaviors to dispositional factors when those behaviors have desirable outcomes but to situational factors when they have undesirable outcomes.

(d) The *ultimate attribution error* (Pettigrew, 2001) applies to attributions made about members of entire groups. It occurs when the negative behaviors of members of one’s own in-groups are attributed to situational factors while the negative behaviors of members of out-groups are consistently attributed to dispositional factors, and vice versa for positive behaviors. The ultimate attribution error has been used to explain the prejudice of members of a majority group toward members of minority groups.

(e) The *group attribution error* applies to attributions made about a group and its members. There are two versions. As described by Hamill, Wilson, and Nisbett (1980), the group attribution error occurs when people believe that an individual group member’s beliefs, attitudes, and preferences are reflective of those of the group as a whole. As described by Allison and Messick (1985), it occurs when people believe that the decision or conclusion drawn by a group reflects the decision or conclusion of each individual group member, even in the presence of information suggesting that the group decision was not unanimous.

Causal attributions are also addressed by Kelley’s (1967) *covariation model*. It proposes that people make attributions about another person’s behavior by considering three types of information: (a) *Consensus:* Would others do the same thing as the person in the same situation?  If the answer is yes, there is high consensus; if no, there is low consensus. (b) *Consistency:* Does the person usually act this way in this type of situation? If the answer is yes, there is high consistency; if no, there is low consistency. (c) *Distinctiveness:* Does the person usually act differently in other types of situations? If the answer is yes, there is high distinctiveness; if no, there is low distinctiveness.

According to this model, when consensus, consistency, and distinctiveness are all high, people are likely to make an external attribution about another person’s behavior. In contrast, when consensus is low, consistency is high, and distinctiveness is low, people are likely to make an internal attribution.

