# Affiliation, Attraction, and Intimacy

Psychologists interested in social relations have identified factors that impact affiliation, interpersonal attraction, and intimate relationships.
1. **Affiliation:** The need for affiliation refers to “the desire to establish and maintain many rewarding interpersonal relationships” (Kassin, Fein, & Markus, 2016, p. 354) and is usually viewed as having an innate component. For example, for evolutionary psychologists, the need for affiliation is the result of natural selection – i.e., people with a strong desire for affiliation were most likely to survive and reproduce. A number of studies have been conducted to identify factors that affect affiliation. Among the most frequently cited are the studies conducted by Schachter (1959) which found that, when highly anxious subjects were given a choice to wait alone or with other participants, they chose to wait with other participants. But, when given the choice to wait alone or with non-participants, they chose to wait alone. Based on these results, Schachter concluded that “misery doesn’t love any kind of company, it loves only miserable company” (p. 24). *Social comparison theory* (Festinger, 1954) has been used to explain the results of Schachter’s research. It predicts that, in uncertain situations, people often compare themselves to others to obtain information about their own abilities, feelings, and other attributes.
2. **Interpersonal Attraction:** Factors that affect interpersonal attraction include mere exposure, similarity, fallibility, and reciprocity.
(a) The *mere exposure effect* is “the tendency for people to come to like things simply because they see or encounter them repeatedly” (Baumeister & Bushman, 2013, p. 241). There’s some evidence that this applies when we initially have a mildly negative, neutral, or positive response to a person but not when our initial response is extremely negative (e.g., Harrison, 1977).

(b) People tend to be attracted to people they perceive to be similar to themselves in terms of important characteristics. Similarity of attitudes is addressed by Byrne’s (1971) *law of attraction*, which states that there’s a positive relationship between attitude similarity and attraction and that this relationship is due to the fact that interacting with people who have similar attitudes is reinforcing because it validates our views and produces good feelings.

(c) Aronson, Willerman, and Floyd’s (1966) research on the *pratfall effect* has shown that the attractiveness of a person who is perceived to be competent increases when that person commits a blunder, while the attractiveness of a person who is perceived to be mediocre decreases when he or she commits a blunder. According to these investigators, the positive effect of a blunder for competent people occurs because it humanizes them. 

(d) The principle of reciprocity predicts that we like people who like us, and vice versa. However, research on the *gain-loss effect* (Aronson & Linder, 1965) modified this generalization by finding that (a) we’re more attracted to people who initially dislike us but then change their minds as they get to know us than we are to people who express constant liking for us and (b) we’re less attracted to people who initially like us and then change their minds than we are to people who express constant dislike for us. In addition, Kenny (1994) distinguishes between two types of reciprocity: *Generalized reciprocity* refers to the degree to which “likers are more likeable” in general, while *dyadic reciprocity* refers to the degree to which specific pairs of individuals like each other. Studies comparing the two types have found that the correlation for dyadic reciprocity tends to be stronger than the correlation for generalized reciprocity.

3. **Intimate Relationships – Emotion Elicitation:** According to Berscheid’s (1991) *emotion-in-relationships model*, strong emotions are elicited in close relationships when a partner interrupts the couple’s usual behavioral routines (sequences) because he or she engages in an unexpected behavior. When the interruption has a desirable outcome, it elicits a positive emotional reaction; when it has an undesirable outcome, it elicits a negative emotional reaction. This model also predicts that the elicitation of strong positive or negative emotions occurs less often in the later stages of a close relationship because a partner’s behaviors are less likely to be unexpected. 

4. **Intimate Relationships – Sexual Jealousy**: Buss, Larsen, Westen, and Semmelroth (1992) found that *sexual and emotional infidelity* elicit jealousy from both men and women, but that men respond more strongly to sexual infidelity while women respond more strongly to emotional infidelity. These investigators provide an evolutionary explanation for this difference and propose that sexual infidelity became more distressing to men because it threatened their certainty about paternity, while emotional infidelity became more distressing to women because it threatened the support and resources they needed to raise their children. Buss et al.’s research has been criticized on methodological grounds, and several investigators have offered alternative explanations for their results. For example, research by DeSteno and Salovey (1996) supports the *double-shot hypothesis*, which predicts that men and women have different expectations about the co-occurrence of sexual and emotional infidelity: Men believe that, for women, being emotionally involved with someone does not necessarily require sexual involvement; but, when a women is sexually involved, she’s also emotionally involved. In contrast, women believe that, for men, being sexually involved with someone does not necessarily require emotional involvement; but, when a man is emotionally involved, he’s also sexually involved.

5. **Gender Differences in Mate Preferences:** Researchers have identified some gender differences in preferred characteristics of potential mates. For example, Buss (1989) asked over 10,000 men and women from 37 cultures in 33 countries what characteristics they valued in a mate. He found that women cared most about characteristics related to earning capacity (e.g., industriousness and ambition), while men cared most about their partners’ physical attractiveness. From an evolutionary perspective, this difference may reflect differences in reproductive goals: According to Buss & Schmitt (1993), the primary reproductive goal for women is to raise children, so they prefer men who have the resources needed to support them and their children. In contrast, the primary goal for men is to maximize the number of offspring they produce and, consequently, they are most attracted to women whose physical appearance suggests health and fertility. For example, a physical trait that men tend to prefer is a low waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) of about 0.7 (waist circumference about 70% of the hip circumference), which is considered to be a marker of a woman’s good health and reproductive abilities (Singh, 1993). [Note that, with a few exceptions, cross-cultural research has confirmed that the preference for a low WHR is universal (e.g., Saad, 2020).]
