# Social Influence – Types of Influence

Researchers interested in social influence have identified several factors that affect willingness to obey authority, comply with requests, and conform to the judgments of others. For example, Brehm and Brehm (1981) found that people may respond to social influence with *psychological reactance*. It occurs when people feel that pressure to behave in a particular way threatens their personal freedom and they attempt to regain their freedom by, for example, doing the opposite of what has been requested or acting aggressively toward the person who made the request. 

1. **Obedience to Authority:** The best known research on obedience to authority is Milgram’s (1974) research evaluating the willingness of subjects to obey an authority even when doing so seemed to harm another person. Subjects in his studies were told by the experimenter they would be “teachers” who would be responsible for getting a “learner” (actually a confederate) to learn a list of words. The experimenter ordered the teacher to give the learner an electric shock each time the learner made a mistake, with the intensity of the shock increasing with each mistake. The original study was conducted at Yale University and the experimenter sat near the teacher while the learner was in an adjacent room where he could be heard but not seen. Before conducting his initial studies, Milgram asked a group of psychiatrists to predict how many subjects would be willing to deliver the highest levels of shock. They predicted that only a “pathological fringe” of 1 in 1,000 would do so, but the majority of both male and female subjects did, despite the fact that the learner screamed in pain at high levels of shock and eventually stopped responding.  In subsequent studies, Milgram varied the conditions by, for example, conducting the study in a run-down office building, having the teacher and learner in the same room, or having the experimenter deliver his orders by phone. In these situations, teachers were less willing to obey the experimenter’s orders to deliver high levels of shock.

Several explanations for Milgram’s results have been offered. Milgram concluded that subjects obeyed the experimenter because the situation put them in an “agentic state,” which he defined as “the condition a person is in when he sees himself as an agent for carrying out another person’s wishes” (1974, p. 111). Other explanations are that the situation was novel and subjects were uncertain about how to behave, the fast pace of the study didn’t give subjects time to reflect on what they were doing, and the increase in shock intensity was gradual and reduced the subjects’ ability to recognize when the experimenter’s orders became unreasonable (Burger, 2011).

Several studies have been conducted to determine if the results obtained by Milgram in the 1970s would be repeated in more recent years with participants who are unfamiliar with Milgram’s study. These studies modified some of the procedures used by Milgram to safeguard participants and meet ethical standards for research but have obtained similar results. For example, Burger (2009) used the protocol of Milgram’s original studies but followed APA’s guidelines for informed consent. Burger also stopped the maximum level of shock at 150 volts (as opposed to Milgram’s 450 volts) and found that the majority of participants continued to deliver shock: While 82.5% of subjects in Milgram’s study delivered shock at 150 volts, 70% of participants in Burger’s study did so, with the difference not being statistically significant. Also, like Milgram, Burger found that male and female participants did not differ in terms of willingness to deliver shock.

2. **Conformity to Group Norms:** Sherif (1935) was one of the first investigators to study conformity to group norms. He used the autokinetic phenomenon (an optical illusion in which a stationary point of light seems to move in a dark room) and found that, when each subject was asked to estimate the light’s movement alone, the estimates varied considerably. However, when a subject was asked to estimate the movement after hearing other subjects (confederates) give their estimates, the subjects conformed to the group norm. In later research, Asch (1951) found that subjects also conformed to the norm even when the stimulus was unambiguous and it was obvious that the estimates made by group members were wrong.
Informational influence and normative influence have been used to explain conformity in ambiguous and unambiguous situations. *Informational influence* occurs when people conform to the judgments of others because they think others know more than they do. It helps explain conformity in ambiguous situations and is likely to lead to private (genuine) acceptance of the judgments of others. *Normative influence* occurs when people conform to the judgments of others to avoid their ridicule or rejection. It helps explain conformity in unambiguous situations and is likely to lead to public acceptance (compliance) without a real change in judgment (Baumeister & Bushman, 2017; Kassin, Fein, & Markus, 2016).

3. **Compliance with Requests: S**everal tactics have been found to increase a person’s willingness to comply with a direct request.  One of these is the *foot-in-the-door technique* which is a two-step process in which the influencer first makes a small request that most people would agree to and, when the person agrees, the influencer makes a larger request. One explanation for the effectiveness of the foot-in-the-door technique is that people usually want to act in consistent ways, and turning down the second request would be inconsistent. Another tactic is the *door-in-the-face technique*, which is also a two-step process. When using this technique, the influencer first makes a large request that most people would reject. Then, when the person turns down the request, the influencer makes a smaller request. One explanation for the effectiveness of this technique is perceptual contrast: After hearing the first request, the second request sounds more reasonable. Another explanation is the norm of mutual reciprocity: After the influencer concedes the initial request and makes a more reasonable one, the person feels that he/she must reciprocate the influencer’s concession by agreeing to the second request (Cialdini, 2009).